TITLE	Late motherhood 'raises breast cancer risk'

Women who put off having children until they reach their 30s are at increased risk of breast cancer, scientists confirmed today.

They also found that the rising number of girls who start their periods early have a higher chance of developing the debilitating disease which strikes 38,000 women a year in the UK.

However, having a miscarriage does not increase the risk of breast cancer at any age, the study of more than 90,000 women found.

The findings have important implications, as the age of menarche - when menstruation begins - has fallen by two years in the past century.

There are now reports of girls as young as eight starting their periods.

The study, published today in the British Journal of Cancer, found a girl whose periods had started at the age of 15 had two-thirds the risk of pre-menopausal breast cancer of someone whose periods had started at 11.

There was a decrease of 7% of risk for each year that periods were delayed. After menopause, the decrease in risk was 3% for each year that periods were delayed.

Compared with those who gave birth before the age of 22, women who had their first child in their 30's were 63% more likely to develop breast cancer before the menopause and 35% more likely to get the disease afterwards.

Miscarriage had no effect on the development of breast cancer in women before or after the menopause.

Professor Gordon McVie, joint director general of Cancer Research UK said this meant abortion would also have no effect as it is biologically similar to miscarriage.

Previous research on miscarriage has produced conflicting results with some smaller studies suggesting it might increase the risk.

Researchers tracked 91,000 French women aged 40-65 over 10 years, sending them detailed questionnaires and recording whether or not they developed breast cancer.

Study leader Dr Francoise Clavel-Chapelon said the age of first full-term pregnancy decreased the risk of breast cancer by 4% a year pre-menopause and 2% post-menopause.

And she added: "In the past, the fear of breast cancer has added to the anxiety felt by women who have miscarried. I am very glad to be able to allay those fears.

"Our study has provided all sorts of information about the influence of reproductive and hormonal factors on the development of breast cancer.

"This will help us understand the mechanism by which breast cancer develops. It is especially interesting that the influences of women's risk of breast cancer can be so different before and after she reaches the menopause."

When asked to speculate on the impact of the findings, she said: "These factors do increase breast cancer but I'm not sure to what extent they are responsible for any increase in the disease."

Delyth Morgan, chief executive of the charity Breakthrough Breast Cancer, said: "These findings are extremely worrying but women shouldn't assume that their childbearing choices will automatically lead to a diagnosis, or not, of breast cancer in later life.

"Having children early is no cast-iron guarantee that you will not get breast cancer. Similarly a late pregnancy doesn't mean that you will experience the disease.

"This study appears to highlight a key risk factor for breast cancer, but we have always known that there is a link between age of first pregnancy and breast cancer. However it needs to be put in context. It is very hard to isolate a specific factor in terms of cause and effect for breast cancer.

"This research emphasises how increasingly important breast awareness is and is yet another reason why we need research into preventing breast cancer in the future."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

