TITLE	Breast cancer risk to older mothers

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Women who delay having children run a much higher risk of breast cancer, it was revealed yesterday.

Those who wait until their 30s have 63 per cent more chance of contracting the disease before the menopause than those who are mothers at 22.

The study, published in the British Journal of Cancer, comes after years in which the age at which women start their families has been rising. Today's average woman has her first child at 29.

The consolation for later mothers is that having a baby at any age reduces the risk compared to staying childless. But having babies in your early 20s is the best natural protection and the more children a woman has, the less the danger of breast cancer after the menopause.

But losing a baby through miscarriage did not leave a woman at extra risk - which probably means an abortion will not do so either, say experts.

The researchers also found that girls who start their periods early - as more and more now do - are at higher risk.

The findings come from a ten-year project by the French research group INSERM, involving almost 100,000 teachers aged 40 to 65.

It is one of the biggest-ever studies of the effects of motherhood and reproductive hormones on the risks of breast cancer, which kills 13,000 women in Britain each year.

Professor Robin Weiss, editor of the British Journal Of Cancer, said: 'These figures are highly significant but remember, you are not certain to get breast cancer just because you haven't had children or had them later.'

Delyth Morgan, chief executive of the charity Breakthrough Breast Cancer, said: 'The findings are extremely worrying, but women shouldn't assume their childbearing choices will automatically lead to a diagnosis, or not, of breast cancer in later life.

'This study needs to be put in context. It is very hard to isolate a specific factor in terms of cause and effect.'

The scientists found that breast cancer risk increased by about three per cent for each year a woman delayed starting a family.

The extra risk fell to 35 per cent after the menopause. Although the lifetime risk of breast cancer is one in nine, the average risk at the age of 25 is 1 in 15,000.

There was also concern at the findings about girls who start menstruation early.

A girl whose periods began at 15 ran two-thirds the risk of getting breast cancer before the menopause as a girl whose periods started at 11.

Study leader Dr Francoise Clavel-Chapelon said the age of menstruation has been falling steadily in the West. She said: 'This could be due to several factors, such as changes in diet or physical activity.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

