TITLE	Denise Van Outen reveals: 'My face is scarred because I spent too much of my youth on sunbeds'

 By Liz Thomas Last updated at 12:25 PM on 17th April 2008

 TV star Denise Van Outen has revealed she suffers pigmentation scars on her skin after over-using sunbeds as a teenager. 

 

 The I'd Do Anything judge warned those still using sunbeds that they were "risking skin cancer for a tan". 

 

 The scars are most visible on her cheeks and brow but are relatively easily hidden by good make-up. 

Scroll down for more

The blonde beauty, whose fresh faced good looks helped catapult her to fame when she presented Channel 4's Big Breakfast show in the late nineties alongside Chris Evans, said using the tanning booths was the biggest regret of her life. 

 

 "I used a sunbed when I was 18 because I didn't know the risks, but I'm paying for it now. It's my big my regret - I have pigmentation problems on my face." 

 

"Tans fade and it's not worth the risk. Now my tan's from a bottle and safe," Van Outen, 33, confessed in her column in Now magazine. 

 

 Health experts are becoming increasingly concern by the side affects from continual sunbed use. 

Cancer Research UK warns: "Sunbeds aren't a safe alternative to tanning. Like the sun, sunbeds give out harmful UV rays which damage the DNA in our skin cells and can cause skin cancer. The more you use a sunbed the greater your risk of skin cancer. Using a sunbed once a month or more, can increase your risk of skin cancer by more than half. So when the tan fades, the damage remains. 

 

 Sunbeds also cause premature skin ageing, which means that your skin becomes coarse, leathery and wrinkled at a younger age." 

 

 About 65,000 cases of skin cancer are reported in the UK each year, with 2,000 proving fatal. 

 

 Most cases are linked to sunburn or prolonged exposure to the sun but it is estimated sunbeds are estimated to cause around 5% of these deaths each year. 

Scroll down for more

 There are three types of skin cancer, basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma and malignant melanoma. 

 

 Malignant melanoma is more dangerous and rarer, but worryingly is the third most common cancer in 15 to 39 year-olds and is rising every year. 

 

A World Health Organisation review of global cancer studies found that those who use sunbeds during their teens, 20s and early 30s are 75 per cent more likely to develop malignant melanoma. 

 

 Although artificial tanning later in life also carries health risks, it is thought young skin is more vulnerable to damage from ultraviolet rays, which can also cause eye cancer and premature ageing. 

 

 

 

A spokeswoman for Cancer Research UK (CRUK) said: "We welcome any reduction in the number of sunbeds available. "We want to see is less people using them and being much more aware of the potential dangers of using sunbeds, especially young people." 

 

Van Outen's revelation comes after a teenage boy hit the headlines after suffering severe blistering from using a sunbed three times in one day. 

 

 Kieron Saunders, of Tredegar, Gwent, burnt his face and back after going into the store while it was unstaffed. Van Outen is now on screens in BBC1's latest talent search competition I'll Do Anything. She is dating Lee Mead, star of Joseph in Andrew Lloyd Webber's West End musical. 

 

The couple met on the set of reality show 'Any Dream Will Do' in 2007 and became a couple after Mead won the public vote to take on the role of Joseph. 

Scroll down for more

Although artificial tanning later in life also carries health risks, it is thought that young skin is more vulnerable to damage from ultraviolet rays, which can also cause eye cancer and premature ageing. 

A spokesman for Cancer Research UK said: "We welcome any reduction in the number of sunbeds available. 

"We want to see fewer people using them and being much more aware of the potential dangers of using sunbeds, especially young people." 

Miss Van Outen's revelation comes after a teenage boy hit the headlines after suffering severe blistering from using a sunbed three times in one day. 

Kieron Saunders, of Tredegar, Gwent, burned his face and back after going into the store while it was unstaffed.

 The 13-year-old spent a total of 21 minutes in a stand-up booth, according to his mother Maria. 

 She fears Kieron, whose burns became infected, could develop skin cancer. 

 And a study found that using sunbeds before the age of 35 significantly raises the risk of the most deadly form of skin cancer. 

 

 

Do you think Russell Brand is a good actor?

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

