TITLE	I pop 25 pills a day - but I would never risk HRT

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 9:15 AM on 20th May 2008

Broadcaster Gloria Hunniford, 68, lives in Sevenoaks, Kent with her husband, hairdressing entrepreneur Stephen Way.

 She lost her daughter Caron Keating to breast cancer in 2004. Here she reveals her health secrets... How well do you sleep? 

Not very well. I regard sleep as almost a waste of time. I fall asleep easily, but rarely stay slumbering for more than four hours. When Caron (Gloria's daughter) was dying, I would lie there thinking about her. Now I might worry about a script or a programme I'm working on. I get up, have a cup of tea and a banana and then sleep like a baby for two or three more hours. Worst pain or illness?

 I smashed my shoulder joint into 15 pieces when I slipped playing tennis. I also broke the humerus (the bone that runs from the shoulder to the elbow). Everyone thought I'd broken my neck. My arm was hanging off backwards and the pain was excruciating. Four years of operations followed. Fifteen years later, I have 80 per cent of the backward movement I should have in that arm. I was never brilliant at tennis, but now anyone can score a point against my backhand. Have you ever called an ambulance? 

Yes, for my husband Stephen, in 2001. He was complaining of a pressure on his chest. At the hospital, they wired him up to an ECG, but decided he was all right to go home, saying it was probably stress. Stephen, in turn, put it down to a bout of flu and went off lecturing the next day. He came home feeling awful and I took him straight back to hospital. They diagnosed a small heart attack. Now, I always go with my gut instinct. Are supplements a waste of money? 

No. They're an insurance policy. I take masses every day &#8212; up to 25, depending on what I need. Doctors say you don't need them if you have a healthy diet, but show me anyone who does. I started taking supplements at 17 because all the Hollywood stars talked about them. NHS or private?

Both. When Stephen had his heart attack, he didn't want to be moved to a private hospital as the NHS one had all the equipment and expertise. But when I had an outpatient appointment at a major London hospital, I was appalled at the lack of cleanliness. We really miss matron. When were you healthiest? 

The early Nineties, when I stayed in London during the week to do a Radio 2 show. I belonged to the Harbour Club and played tennis or went to the gym every day. 

Have you ever felt depressed? 

I'm a A positive person, but after Caron's death, I had to fight my way out of a black hole. It was a long and tough battle, and I could see how it could take people out. There came a point when I knew I had to turn it around. I have other children and a husband and I had to get back to some semblance of normality. I never resorted to anti-depressants. What helped were letters from other grieving people and throwing myself into work. Do you use alternative treatments?

 I'm a great believer in acupuncture for body maintenance. Having watched Caron having it in Australia when she was ill, I could see it was a great pain controller. She had Japanese needles, which are finer and less painful than Chinese ones. Eventually I found a practitioner in London who uses them. I see him about every six weeks to keep up my energy. When did you last see a doctor? SIX months ago for a regular check on my underactive thyroid. It was diagnosed six years ago, quite by accident during a routine blood test. I'm one of the lucky ones. With an underactive thyroid, I should be six stone overweight and dog tired. I've got a little to shift, but not that much. I take a daily thyroxine tablet. I also have my cholesterol checked as the condition can raise it. At one point, it was 6.9 (5.5 is healthy) and the doctor said I had to get it down. I tried to go light on sweets and cakes but I couldn't lower it. Then, in the New Year, I got an exercise bike, put a mental lock on the grandchildren's goody cupboard and starting using cholesterol-lowering foods. After just three weeks, my cholesterol had gone down to 5.22. Have you ever been on a crash diet? 

Never. But for quick weight loss, nothing could beat Strictly Come Dancing. With all the rehearsals, I lost 10lb. Do you believe in the male menopause? I THINK men do go through a mid-life crisis in their 40s. If they've had children in their 20s, they start thinking about what to do with the rest of their lives. Some women have a tough time, but I sailed through. I hadn't wanted to do HRT as I like to do things naturally, but I never even had a hot flush. Now HRT has been linked to breast cancer, I think it was a good decision. My mother died of breast cancer at 74, and Caron at only 42. How do you relax?

 With difficulty. I'm not a relaxed person. I'm doing my best to relax more as I get older. I function better with a little stress. Lentil burgers or beefburgers?

 I was brought up on meat, veg and the frying pan, but after Stephen's heart attack we try to eat more healthily. We cook from fresh and I'm eating red meat just once a week. Is exercising worth it?

 I'm not the best at it, but whenever I do it, I feel a mental and physical lightness. I enjoy using my exercise bike at home as I don't get time for the gym. I hope it will help me with the slight twinges of arthritis I have been getting in my left knee. Cutting out white wine seems to have helped, too. I think it made my system acidic. How often do you have check-ups? 

I have breast cancer check-ups every two to three years and, because of our family history, it's always a massive relief when I get the all clear. I have it done privately so I can be sure of seeing the same doctor. How important is sex to a healthy lifestyle? 

To have a happy emotional life is wonderful. Stephen and I celebrate our tenth wedding anniversary this September and I don't know where I would have been without him when Caron became ill. Love is the best medicine. Best health advice your mother ever gave you? 

She said you should always buy a good pair of shoes and a good bed, because if you're not in one, you're in the other. Do you carry a donor card? 

I think they're a brilliant idea, but I haven't signed up for one. I once interviewed the mother of an organ donor and the recipient of his heart. She leaned across and felt her son's heart beating in another person's body. Donating an organ is a great gift. I can't live without... Vitamins, especially vitamin C, as the body excretes it every day so you need to keep taking it. Gloria is involved with Flora pro.activ's campaign to raise awareness about the risks of raised cholesterol levels. Go to www.checkforchange.co.uk 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

