TITLE	Everything you know about sun care is WRONG

 By Dr Nick Lowe Last updated at 12:28 AM on 29th May 2008

Most of us think we're pretty savvy about skin cancer but there remains much confusion and misinformation. Here one of Britain's top dermatologists debunks the myths...

 

Most sun damage is done in childhood so there's no point covering up now 

Fact: If you've had a lot of sun exposure as a kid, you may have latent cancers under your skin. There's even more reason to take care now because a new hit of sunlight can activate those cancers. 

You can protect your skin by picking the right Sun Protection Factor (SPF) 

Fact: The SPF only measures protection against the UVB rays that cause burning, not the deeper-penetrating UVA rays.

 We now know UVA rays can damage DNA and cause skin cancer, so pick a product with four-star UVA protection as well as a good SPF. If you have high SPF but no UVA protection, you are lulled into a false sense of security  -  you may not be burning but the UVA rays are damaging your skin. 

Remember, too, that sunscreen has its limits. Pale skin can burn in an hour or less, even with a good suncream, so you also need to cover up or get in the shade. 

Everybody needs SPF15+ daily to protect against skin cancer 

Fact: If you have fair skin or have a family history of skin cancer then I'd advise using SPF15 with UVA protection daily, going up to SPF30 in sunny weather. But people with olive or darker skin don't have the same risk of skin cancer so they don't need as much protection. 

That said, all skin types will age, so using a daily UVA/UVB screen protects against premature wrinkling and pigmentation caused by year-round sun exposure. 

One-a-day sunscreens will keep you safe 

Fact: I'm not convinced. They may last longer than conventional suncream but I feel all sunscreens should be reapplied immediately if you have been sweating or swimming. 

The best cream to buy is a total sun block Fact: They don't exist. The only sun block is a brick wall. No sunscreen can shut out 100 per cent of UV rays. Even windows let through UV rays. Most clothes don't even act as sunblocks either  -  a thin T-shirt gives an SPF of around five. 

If your skin is vulnerable to damage, you need to cover up with closely-woven sun protection fabrics and stay in the shade between 11am and 2pm. And don't be fooled by numbers on a bottle: an SPF 50 only blocks out 0.2 per cent more UV rays than an SPF 30. 

 

All SPFs have been scientifically tested 

Fact: Many day moisturisers and foundations promise SPF protection but there's no legal requirement for cosmetic products to prove it. 

However, all dedicated suncreams sold in the UK must, by law, have undergone proper testing to ensure you get the protection stated on the pack. To be doubly sure, buy your products at a reputable store such as Boots, which ensures all the suncare brands it stocks have been properly tested. 

If you are holidaying outside the EU or the US, buy your products at home, not at the resort. 

 

Daily sun protection overloads and aggravates the skin 

Fact: Not as long as you choose wisely. Check labels for benzophenone and PABAs, which can increase sun sensitivity in some skin.

 If you have sensitive skin, you may be less likely to react to "physical" sunscreens, which reflect away UV with titanium or zinc oxide, rather than sunscreens that absorb UV rays. Contrary to popular belief, both types of sunscreen are chemicals. 

 

After-sun minimises skin damage Fact: Many after-sun products contain a plethora of fancy antioxidant vitamins but it really is a case of shutting the stable door after the horse has bolted. You're better off buying suncream with antioxidants. 

After-sun products may help to mop up some damage from UV rays  -  for example, night "repair" creams  -  but it's also important to use them during sun exposure, not after. 

Tanning beds damage skin only if used long term &lt;b&gt;Fact: &lt;/b&gt;A shocking new study found that just one session on a sunbed before the age of 35 increased the risk of melanoma by 98 per cent. 

Sunbeds emit a huge amount of UVA. We think young people are at much higher risk because their skin's defence mechanisms aren't fully developed and their skin is more susceptible to DNA damage. 

 

Burnt skin needs to be covered in high factor Fact: Burnt skin needs to stay out of the sun until it has healed, a process that takes 10-14 days. If your skin is burnt, its protective barrier has been totally stripped away. That means any further UV rays can penetrate much deeper and wreak havoc with your DNA. 

Skin cancer only shows up as a mole 

 Fact: The most deadly form of skin cancer, malignant melanoma, can occasionally look like an enlarged freckle, or even a "bruise" under the fingernail that doesn't heal. The second most dangerous type, squamous cell, tends to be a scaly patch that's commonly mistaken for eczema. If an "eczema" patch doesn't heal with treatment, go back to your GP. 

Dr Lowe is consultant dermatologist at The Cranley Clinic, 19a Cavendish Square, W1. Tel: 020 7499 3223.

   More... Top sun lotion brands do not offer the protection claimed on the bottle, study claims 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

