TITLE	Drinking organic milk 'may cut risk of heart disease and cancer'

 By Fiona Macrae Last updated at 4:21 PM on 13th June 2008

Drinking organic milk may cut the risk of heart disease and cancer, research suggests. A comparison of conventional and organic dairy farms found the organic variety contained significantly higher levels of health-boosting fatty acids, antioxidants and vitamins. Levels of conjugated linoleic acid - a fatty acid credited with lowering the risk of heart problems and cancer - were up to 60 per cent higher.

It is thought high grass content of the animals' diet leads to more nutritious milk. The Newcastle University researchers said that in an 'ideal world' everyone would switch to organic milk, despite it being around 10 pence a pint dearer than the traditional pint. Study leader Gillian Butler said: 'We have known for some time that what cows are fed has a big influence on milk quality. 

 'What is different about this research is it clearly shows that on organic farms, letting cows graze naturally using a forage-based diet is the most important reason for the differences in composition between organic and conventional milk.' Asked if everyone should switch to organic milk, she said: 'In an ideal world it would be better but logistically I don't think there would be enough.   'It is more expensive to produce as you get less milk per unit of land and it is more expensive to buy. 'But because it is higher in all these beneficial compounds you don't need to buy as much to get the health benefits. 'What I am trying to do is identify what it is about organic milk that makes it healthier then maybe we can use that to improve milk quality across the board. 'It is important conventional dairy farmers keep an open mind and maybe tweak their production systems to improve the fatty acids in their milk.' 

Is organic food worth the extra money?

 Organic milk is produced by cows with fibre-rich diet that is predominately made up of grass, hay and silage, rather than the soya and cereals that usually dominate. The animals also tend to have better access to pastures, which are free of pesticides and fertilisers, and are only given antibiotics when they are actually ill. The study, published in the Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, is the latest to deem organic milk the cream of the crop. Previous research has shown it to be rich in omega 3, a fatty acid said to have a host of health benefits, from combating heart disease to boosting intelligence. The milk, which contains high levels of vitamins A and E, has also been shown to cut the risk of eczema in children by more than a third. A spokesman for the Organic Milk Suppliers Co-operative said: 'We hope this latest research will open the eyes of organic sceptics and encourage more consumers to switch to enjoy the benefits of organic milk.' However, the Food Standards Agency, which two years ago turned down calls for organic milk to be labelled as the healthier option, remains to be convinced. A spokesman for the agency said: 'While the nutrient profile of organic milk appears to be different from non-organic milk, care must be taken when drawing conclusions as to the nutritional significance of this.' He added that the fatty acids found in milk were not as beneficial as those in oily fish. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

