TITLE	Diseased gums 'can increase the risk of cancer'

 By Jenny Hope Last updated at 1:49 AM on 27th May 2008

 Victims of gum disease have a higher cancer risk, scientists say. 

Researchers found men with unhealthy gums had a 14 per cent greater chance of developing the cancer. The findings are likely to apply to women too, they said. 

Gum disease causes bad breath and bleeding gums. If it goes untreated, cavities, receding gums and tooth loss can follow, as bacteria or plaque settles between teeth and under the gum line. 

Recent studies have linked it to health problems such as heart disease. But a study published today in The Lancet Oncology is the most authoritative so far to investigate a possible link with cancer. Scientists are uncertain as to why there is a link.

But they suspect that gum disease may lead to general inflammation in the body, which promotes tumour growth.

Alternatively, it could be a sign of a weak immune system. 

Smoking has long been associated with gum disease. And when smokers were taken out of the equation, to exclude the effect of tobacco, the cancer risk rose to 21 per cent. 

Dr Dominique Michaud, an epidemiologist at Imperial College London, used data from a study begun in 1986 focusing on U.S. male health professionals aged 40 to 75.

They were asked about health and lifestyle, including any gum disease with bone loss and tooth loss in the previous two years, smoking history and diet.

Any cancers diagnosed during a follow-up period typically covering 17.7 years, were noted. 

Among the 48,375 men, 5,720 cancers were recorded, excluding non-malignant skin cancer and non-aggressive prostate cancer. 

The most common were bowel, malignant skin cancer, lung, bladder and advanced prostate. Men with a history of gum disease had a higher risk of lung cancer (36 per cent), kidney cancer (49 per cent), pancreatic cancer (54 per cent), and white blood- cell cancers (30 per cent), when compared with those with no record of gum problems. 

Having fewer than half the normal number of teeth was associated with a 70 per cent increased risk of lung cancer. 

Dr Michaud said: 'The findings suggest dental and oral health is more significant to overall health than we thought in the past.' 

Gum disease may affect cancer risk by causing inflammation in the body, a mechanism believed to promote-heart disease, she added. But it could be a marker for those who are more susceptible to immune system problems. 

 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

