TITLE	Men who exercise regularly are 'less likely to die from cancer'

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 9:09 PM on 27th May 2008 

Active men are less likely to die from cancer than couch potatoes, research shows. 

It reveals that men who take regular exercise are up to a third less likely to die from cancer than those who do not. 

Researchers monitored the health and physical activity of 40,708 men aged between 45 and 79 for seven years. 

During this period, 3,714 developed cancer and 1,153 died from the disease. 

Men who walked or cycled for at least 30 minutes a day were 34 per cent less likely to die from cancer than those who exercised less or did nothing at all, experts at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm say. 

However, the same activities were found only to reduce the chance of developing cancer by 5 per cent, although the researchers claim this could be down to chance. 

A more intensive programme of walking and cycling for between an hour and an hour and a half a day was associated with a 16 per cent lower chance of developing the disease. 

Study leader Professor Alicja Wolk, from the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, said: 'These results clearly show for the first time, the effect that very simple and basic daily exercise such as walking or cycling has in reducing cancer death risk in middle-age and elderly men.

'Additionally, this study threw up some really promising data on the role exercise can play in preventing cancer which we would like to explore further in future work.' The research was published today in the British Journal of Cancer.

Dr Lesley Walker, director of cancer information at the charity Cancer Research UK, which publishes the journal, said: 'This study gives us a clear indication that men who exercise are less likely to die from cancer, and that they are more likely to survive the disease if they get it.

'It's encouraging to see research that helps us understand in more detail what steps men can take to reduce risk of cancer.

'It's not entirely clear from this study what role exercise plays in preventing cancer in men, but we do know that a healthy lifestyle can prevent up to half of all cancers - and regular exercise forms a key part of this. 

'Cancer Research UK recommends maintaining a healthy body weight, eating sensibly and taking regular exercise as key to a healthy life - along with avoiding smoking.

'But it is important to note that when deciding to exercise more, people must take into account their own level of fitness and build up their exercise carefully.' 

 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

