TITLE	Contraceptive coil could cut risk of womb cancer, scientists reveal

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 8:24 AM on 11th June 2008

A contraceptive device used by millions of women could cut the risk of womb cancer, scientists said today.

A form of the coil may prevent cancer of the uterus in high-risk patients, researchers believe.

Hormones released by the coil act to reduce the thickness of the womb wall where the disease develops.

Womb, or endometrial cancer, is the fifth most common cancer among women in the UK, with 6,400 new cases diagnosed each year.

If the trial is successful, researchers hope more women will prevent the development of the cancer and so avoid hysterectomies.

Scientists will test their theory in a four-year trial on 220 women, using a coil called Mirena IUS.

The study is a collaboration between Queen Mary, University of London and St George's, University of London and Cancer Research UK.

The research is aimed at women who have inherited a condition called Lynch syndrome, a genetic fault which greatly increases the risk of womb cancer.

In Britain, two per cent of women develop the cancer - but this rises to 60 per cent of those with the syndrome.

Only women with the condition will be involved in the trial, called the Prevention of Endometrial Tumours and funded by Cancer Research UK. 

The coil releases the hormone progestagen and one of its effects is to reduce the thickness of the womb wall. 

Endometrial cancer develops from the wall of the uterus and by limiting its growth, progestagen stops the emergence of the disease. 

The trials will be carried out at hospitals across Britain. 

Dr Victoria Murday, a consultant clinical geneticist at Yorkhill Hospital, Glasgow, involved in the project, said: "We are uncertain how effective it is to screen for the cancer in women at increased risk of the disease, so prevention is the key. 

"Earlier research has provided evidence that Mirena IUS may reduce the risk of endometrial cancer, and we hope that this study can show that it has this effect for women at high risk who otherwise might opt for a hysterectomy." 

She went on: "If it's shown to be effective in reducing risk of (womb) cancer in these women, then it would be prescribed as a prevention." 

Scientists are now recruiting women aged 25 to 65 for the trial. 

Half the women will receive yearly monitoring and the other half will receive yearly monitoring and be fitted with the coil. 

An annual ultrasound will be carried out to check for signs of cancer and they will fill out a questionnaire. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

