TITLE	Wealthy background can raise the risk of cancer for teenagers

 By Jenny Hope Last updated at 2:00 AM on 10th June 2008

Children and teenagers from wealthier families may be more likely to develop cancer, say specialists.

Research suggests that, in contrast to cancers in adults, the number of new cases and deaths in youngsters is more likely to be lower in relatively deprived areas.

Experts said that certain cancers that occur in the young such as skin and brain tumours were most closely associated with affluence  -  although the reasons for this are not yet clear.

 Professor Jillian Birch of Cancer Research Uk told a conference in London yesterday: 'Overall, cancer incidence and mortality increase with increasing deprivation. However, different cancers and age groups show different patterns.

'Geographical variations in incidence, trends over time and associations with deprivation and affluence can point to lifestyle or other environmental factors as possible causes.'

Professor Birch added: 'Until recently, very little was known about the detailed patterns of cancer in teenagers and young adults, but my group has carried out a series of studies to rectify this. The most recent studies have looked at geographical variations, time trends and associations with deprivation. 

'Results show that in contrast to cancers in older people, incidence and mortality decreases with increasing deprivation in young people.

'This is because the more common types of cancers that occur in young people are associated with affluence, including lymphomas, brain tumours, germ cell tumours and melanoma.

'These cancers also show signifstudyicant regional variations in incidence and are increasing over time.' 

Professor Birch is director of the Cancer Research UK Paediatric and Familial Cancer research group, at Manchester University. 

She was speaking at the Teenage Cancer Trust's Fifth International Conference on Teenage and Young Adult Cancer Medicine. 

Her findings follow a major earlier this year showing that children who attend day care or playgroups are significantly less likely to develop leukaemia than other youngsters. 

The protection is thought to arise from exposure to common infections from the first months and years of life which helps switch on the immune system  -  a key player in the development of childhood leukaemia. 

Professor Birch also told the conference that studies by her group had found some cancer rates were rising in younger people. 

These include cervical cancer and melanoma skin cancer, which are two potentially preventable forms of the disease. 

Regular smears can prevent cervical abnormalities progressing to full-blown cancer. 

She said: 'It is important that public health messages about these two mainly preventable cancers are targeted appropriately.' 

Simon Davies, chief executive at Teenage Cancer Trust said: 'Cervical cancer and melanoma, two preventable cancers, are increasing in teenagers faster than in other groups. More education is desperately needed so young people can change their behaviour before it's too late.' 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

