TITLE	Why affluent women in the South are more likely to die from breast cancer

 By Daniel Martin Last updated at 4:01 PM on 04th July 2008

Affluent women in the South are more likely to die from breast cancer than those with more disadvantaged lifestyles, a study has found. 

While general cancer rates for Northerners are 20 per cent higher  -  mainly due to greater rates of poverty and smoking  -  the trend is dramatically reversed for breast cancer. 

Experts say this is likely to be because well-off women are more likely to delay childbirth to further their careers. 

This then increases the chances of developing breast cancer due to hormone changes in the body. 

Ed Yong, of Cancer Research UK, said: 'We know that reproductive factors such as having children later and having fewer children can increase the risk of breast cancer  -  and that is the most likely explanation for this geographic distribution. 

'Hormones, especially the female sex hormone estrogen, have a big influence on the development of breast cancer, and having children affects the level of hormones in the body. This does not mean that people living in the South should panic. 

'By screening, breast cancer can be detected at an early stage. There are ways to reduce the risk, including limiting alcohol intake and body weight.' 

The report analyses figures for 2005, which show the highest death rate for breast cancer was Hertfordshire, Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire. 

However, for other cancers, the situation was reversed. 

There were 68 deaths per 100,000 men from lung cancer in the North compared with an average of 51 deaths across the whole of England. 

Meanwhile, Surrey, West Sussex and Hampshire had the lowest rate of deaths from lung cancer, with around 36 men in every 100,000 dying from the disease. 

Many cancers linked to lifestyle factors, such as smoking and diet, are more prevalent in the North. 

A larger number smoke and this can lead to cancers of the lung, mouth, pancreas, bladder, liver, stomach, cervix and bowel. 

People in the North are also more likely to be overweight, leading to bowel cancer. 

And drinking too much can lead to cancers of the mouth, oesophagus and bowel. 

The data was contained in the first report produced by the National Cancer Intelligence Network. 

It collects data on deaths from 30 cancer networks covering the whole of England. 

Professor Mike Richards, the Government's National Cancer Director, said the differences could be caused by varying levels of prosperity. 

'In the North, even though breast cancer rates are high, more women die of lung cancer,' he said. 

'That's a reflection of higher levels of smoking in more deprived areas. It goes in an opposite direction with breast cancer. Affluent women often tend to delay childbirth and having children older may slightly increase the risk of the disease. 

'Furthermore, an increasing proportion of breast cancer is detected through screening. 'There is some evidence that women in more affluent areas are more likely to attend screenings.' 

The report shows that cancer deaths overall were lowest in the South of England and the Midlands. 

Prostate cancer was the most commonly diagnosed form of the disease in men. 

An average of 97 in every 100,000 men in England were diagnosed in 2005, compared with 60 for lung cancer. 

Among women, breast cancer was the most commonly diagnosed. 

A spokesman for the Department of Health said: 'Tackling health inequalities is one of our top priorities. We will be working with the local NHS to agree challenging goals for reducing cancer mortality in every cancer network area by 2012.' 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

