TITLE	Broccoli 'could combat prostate cancer'

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 8:54 AM on 02nd July 2008

 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

 Broccoli may combat prostate cancer by altering the genes involved in tumour growth, a study has shown. 

Scientists made the discovery after adding either peas or broccoli to the diets of two groups of men for a year. 

They then analysed tissue samples from the men using technology that gauges the activity of thousands of genes. 

The results showed that a diet rich in broccoli produced changes in gene activity that were likely to stop or slow cancer growth. 

Professor Richard Mithen, from the Institute of Food Research in Norwich, said: 'This is the first study providing experimental evidence that diets rich in cruciferous vegetables may reduce the risk of prostate cancer.' 

Cruciferous vegetables are a family that includes broccoli, Brussels sprouts, cabbage, cauliflower and kale. 

Before the study it was already known that eating as little as one portion of broccoli every week can reduce the risk of prostate cancer and lessen the chances of confined cancer becoming more aggressive. 

The research also confirmed that men with a gene called GSTM1 benefit most from eating broccoli, and suggested that men without the gene would have to eat more broccoli to get the same benefit. 

The study involved 22 men aged 57 to 70 who had pre-cancerous prostate cells and were considered at risk of the disease. 

Professor Mithen's team used broccoli that was specially grown at an experimental farm in Norwich and high in sulphur- containing compounds that may account for the vegetable's anti-cancer properties. 

But the scientists pointed out that after blanching and freezing, the broccoli yielded roughly the same amount of active chemicals as fresh broccoli. 

Professor Mithen added: 'Other fruits and vegetables have been shown to also reduce the risk of prostate cancer and are likely to act through other mechanisms. 

'Once we understand these, we can provide much better dietary advice. 

'Until then, eating two or three portions of cruciferous vegetable per week, and maybe a few more if you lack the GSTM1 gene, should be encouraged.' 

The findings were reported in the online journal PLoS ONE. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

