TITLE	Tried and tested: Are you buying the right suncream for your child?

 Last updated at 9:00 AM on 01st July 2008

The sun may not always shine here, but British children have the highest skin cancer rate in Europe  -  and parents must bear some of the blame. 

Recent research by Sunsense, an Australian suncare brand, found 10 per cent of British parents never protect their child with sunscreen. 

Furthermore, a quarter of parents don't think it necessary to apply sun protection before children leave for school in the morning during the summer months, according to a survey by The British Skin Foundation. 

The fact is, even though our sun seems mild compared to the Med, we need to protect our children's skin. On a cloudy day, 80 per cent of the harmful UV rays still get through, which is why you can burn when it's cloudy. 

'Protecting your child's skin is particularly important, as children are exposed to greater doses of UV than adults,' says Dr Richard Turner, a consultant dermatologist with an interest in skin cancer at the Churchill Hospital in Oxford. 

'Children spend more time outdoors and have long summer holidays  -  it's estimated they get 25 per cent of their lifetime exposure by the time they are 18. 

Sunburn in childhood can double the risk of skin --cancer, causing deep-seated damage that only becomes apparent much later as skin cancer can take years to develop.' 

UV light is made up of UVA and UVB rays. UVA rays are the ones that cause premature ageing; UVB rays cause burning. Both increase the risk of skin cancer. 

The sunscreens that offer the best protection have both a high UVA and a high UVB rating, says Dr Turner. 

UVA rating is not always listed on sunscreen packaging, but when it is, it's measured in stars out of five. UVB is measured by the skin protection factor (SPF). 

'Children's sunscreen should have a minimum of 30SPF, and perhaps 40SPF for babies and toddlers,' says Dr Turner. 

He says it should be applied 30 minutes before your child goes outside to give it time to dry, then reapply every two or three hours and after swimming. 

'Most people don't put enough sunscreen on,' he adds, advising a tablespoon's worth for a twoyearold, two tablespoons for a ten-year-old and four tablespoons for an adult. 

But with such an array of sunscreens to choose from, how do you know what's best for your child? 

Here, Dr Turner reviews some of the most popular brands. We then rate them according to his comments and the price of the product.... 

TESCO KIDS SUN PROTECTION COLOURED STICK

Dr Turner says: 'This is a brilliant idea as it's like a face crayon, so it's fun to apply. However, it's not very practical  -  the consistency is very thick and greasy, more like face paint. It also has an unpleasant perfume. 

'I must commend its very high UVB (SPF50) and UVA (five-star) protection, but can't imagine using it much on my children as it's hard to apply evenly. It could be useful for the nose or tips of the ears, in addition to a conventional sunscreen for the rest of the body.' 

6/10

 

'This one has an easy to apply formulation, pleasant smell and excellent UVB (SPF50) and UVA (five-star) rating. It's also the only one in our test to contain a wasp and insect repellent. 

'The sweet smell of some sunscreens may attract insects so this seems a great idea. Good price, and both the UVA and UVB are high.' 

10/10

JOHNSON'S SUN CARE BABY SUN PROTECTION CREAM

Boots, Mothercare and major supermarkets, 0845 602 0333 

'This is specifically designed for babies and has no chemical sunscreens in it, which may be good if your baby has very sensitive skin or eczema. 

'It uses titanium dioxide as a physical sunscreen and provides an SPF40, but only a UVA three-star rating. Like the Clarins product, it's very thick and white when applied. 

6/10

01557 870 567, www.lavera.co.uk 

'Some parents prefer natural sunscreens like this one because they minimise exposure to chemicals (which can be a good idea for children with sensitive skin or eczema, for example). 

'his natural sunscreen uses titanium dioxide as a physical sunscreen and has no chemical sunscreens. 

'However, unlike the Clarins one, which is also titanium only, this sunscreen is nicer to apply and more comfortable on the skin. It also has a light lemon fragrance. My main concern is that SPF25 may be a little low for children, and no UVA rating is given. 

'It does, however, conform to Australian standards, suggesting it should be sufficient.'

0800 036 3558, www.clarins.co.uk 

'This is thick and extremely white like emulsion paint, so children may not like this being applied to their skin  -  it felt pretty awful, too. The skin stays white for a long time. 'It uses titanium dioxide as a physical sunscreen  -  this reflects UV radiation off the skin like mirrors, rather than absorbing rays, as chemical sunscreens do. There is no UVA rating, but the UVB protection (SPF30) is adequate.' 

6/10

 

 01386 792 642, www.drhauschka.co.uk 

'This organic sunscreen is a thick yellow lotion with a strong, almost overpowering perfume. 

'Children may dislike it because it's greasy, doesn't rub in well and also stays quite yellow on the skin. 

'It was hard to wash off, suggesting it is waterproof as the packaging claims  -  although sunscreen should always be reapplied after swimming to be on the safe side. 

'The UVB protection (SPF30) is adequate, but not as good as many of its rivals. There is also no UVA protection stated. There are no chemical sunscreens but it uses titanium dioxide as a physical sunscreen.' 

5/10

 

SUPERDRUG KIDS SOLAIT 

020 8684 7000, www.superdrug.com 

'I like this sachet format  -  it's handy for taking on holiday or slipping into a bag in case the sun comes out. 

The UVB (SPF30) and UVA (five-star) ratings are adequate, and the cream has an appealing fruity fragrance, rubbing in well without being greasy. It uses both chemical sunscreens and titanium dioxide.' 

8/10 

 

'This is the only aerosol we tested and it does provide excellent coverage, although it feels sticky and greasy. 

'In terms of protection it uses both chemical and physical sunscreens to provide SPF50 and a fourstar UVA rating.' 

8/10

 

 www.sunsense.co.uk 

'This roll-on design is excellent for teaching children how to apply sunscreen themselves or to keep in their school bag. It's really easy to use and glides on easily  -  my 12-year-old son loved it. 

'It's not particularly white when applied to the skin and has a pleasant smell. The UVB rating (SPF50) is excellent and ensures that the UVA rating (four stars) is also very good.'

AUBREY ORGANICS NATURAL SUN GREEN TEA PROTECTIVE SUNSCREEN www.aubreyorganicsuk.co.uk 

'This claims to be ideal for children, but I disagree. The lotion separates into a gritty, grey liquid when squeezed from the tube  -  my children wouldn't like the little green lumps it forms. 

'It's SPF25 but there's no UVA rating given. It also contains a chemical sunscreen called padimate O (or PABA ester), which animal studies have suggested might be linked to DNA damage. 

'There are much better sunscreens around than this one.' 

 

MARKS  and  SPENCER FORMULA KIDS SENSITIVE SKIN MOISTURISING SPRAY 

'Kids will love the water-pistol design of this, which sprays out a fine jet of pale green liquid. However, while I'd encourage a generous application of sunscreen, the volume that this spray delivers is huge, so it will run out quickly. 

'The fragrance is quite light. It uses chemical sunscreens to provide good UVB protection (SPF30) and has a five-star UVA rating.' 

7/10

 NIVEA SUN CHILDREN'S SUN SPRAY 

'This spray was my 12-year-old's favourite. It's easy to apply, and the lotion is pale green so you can see which areas are covered. 

'This rubs in easily and has a light, pleasant fragrance. The SPF (50+) is excellent and it has a four-star UVA rating, which is very good.' 

9/10

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

