TITLE	Why men with desk jobs have higher risk of prostate cancer

 By Luke Salkeld Last updated at 12:03 AM on 05th July 2008 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

Men who work sitting at a desk are more likely to develop prostate cancer than manual workers, a study has shown. 

Scientists looked at whether levels of physical activity in the workplace were linked with tumours and found that having a desk job significantly increased the risks. 

Men who worked as civil servants, teachers or in office jobs were much more likely to get cancer than those who spend much of their day on their feet, such as labourers, bakers and barbers.

The findings, published in the European Journal of Cancer Prevention, confirm the benefits of regular exercise in reducing the risk of prostate cancer. 

Although exercise during leisure time is thought to protect against a range of cancers, few studies have looked at workplace activity. 

A team of researchers from the University of Athens studied 320 prostate cancer patients and compared them with a similar group of men free from the disease. 

All the volunteers were questioned about the type of jobs they did, and the results revealed that men in sedentary office jobs were 30 per cent more likely to have prostate cancer and 40 per cent more likely to have a non-cancerous condition called benign prostatic hyperplasia, or BPH. 

This is a common disease in which the prostate becomes enlarged, making it difficult to urinate. Although it is not life-threatening, it can require surgery. 

In a report on their findings, the researchers, led by Dr Areti Lagiou, said: 'In 1997, physical activity was not even listed as a possible protective factor against prostate cancer. 

'During the last decade, however, evidence has accumulated that it may convey protection.' 

Nearly 32,000 cases of prostate cancer are diagnosed every year in Britain and 10,000 men die from it - equivalent to more than one every hour. 

The risks increase with age, with men over 50 more likely to develop a tumour, and there is also a strong genetic element involved. 

Earlier this week, another study showed that a diet rich in broccoli may combat prostate cancer by producing changes in gene activity that were likely to stop or slow tumour growth.

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

