TITLE	Meet Jack, who puffs his way through 10 cigars every day, enjoys a shot of whisky and is celebrating his 100th birthday

 By Tamara Cohen Last updated at 6:18 PM on 16th July 2008

Jack Priestly always hoped he would reach his 100th birthday feeling fit as a fiddle.

But he was even more shocked to reach the milestone given that he has been a chain smoker since the tender age of nine.

For the past 91 years, the former baker has puffed through 153,000 cigars and more than 700,000 cigarettes. 

And since the age of 24, he has knocked back a shot of whisky in his morning cup of tea every day.

But despite smoking 40 cigarettes a day for half a century, when Jack switched to cigars aged 58 for health reasons, the sprightly pensioner has suffered no health problems related to either tobacco or alcohol. 

Since retiring 35 years ago, he had looked after himself, done the shopping twice a week, tended the garden and driven himself around town. 

Celebrating his centenary surrounded by more than 60 family members at his home in Pinchbeck, Lincolnshire, Jack said: 'I love my cigars. I wouldn't be without them. 

'I don't care about the brand - a cigar is a cigar.

'From all the government warnings you see these days you'd think everyone would be too scared to go near a box of matches let alone take up smoking. 

'But it's never done me any harm.

''A tot of whisky and puff makes my day. 

'I never thought I'd make 100, but now I'm here I still feel like I'm 50 inside. 

'Life is too short to be worried about little things, you should enjoy what you like in moderation and make the best of it.'

Now a great-gandfather of six, Jack, who lost his wife Louise to cancer in 1993, had his first puff of tobacco in 1917 at the back of his father's bakery.

Within weeks he was getting through packets of 20 cigarettes a day, of all brands, and over the years got through 36,000 packets, or 715,000 cigarettes. 

After years of puffing, he gave up on the advice of his doctor in 1975, and has since got through the day with 10 six-inch Corona cigars. 

His lifetime habit may have cost him £650,000 at today's prices, but Jack said he has no regrets.   

'My doctor wasn't a fan of pipes, and advised me to smoke cigars instead.

'And who am I to ignore doctor's orders', he said. 

'They're supposed to be better for you and they give a nicer more relaxing smoke. 

'I've still got a good set of lungs. There's nothing wrong with them.' 

It was on his mother-in-law's advice to glug a shot of whisky at the start of the day, before breakfast, and he has kept it up for 76 years. 

'A shot of whisky before I shower or have breakfast is the best advice anyone ever gave me', said Jack who has lived alone since his wife, who never drank or smoked, died of pancreatic cancer aged 83. 

He said: 'I know I've been lucky, but  I don't feel my age I feel like  a young man. 

'The only thing I'm missing is the company of a good woman. 

'That would make me feel 40 years younger in a flash.'

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

