TITLE	Health risks in the air, says study

by JAMES CHAPMAN, Daily Mail

Air pollution is increasing Britons' risk of dying from lung cancer and heart disease, a study showed yesterday.

Diesel engines and industry are major sources of fine particles of soot, which settle deep in the lungs and have a similar effect to passive smoking.

The findings emerged as environment campaigners named and shamed the ten worst factories for the pollution that can cause cancer.

The study on city-wide pollution followed research in America on more than 500,000 adults over 16 years.

The dirtier the air, the greater the risk, it emerged - leading to calls for a clampdown on exhaust emissions.

Previous studies have linked soot in the air to many respiratory ailments, including asthma, but the latest research provides the most compelling evidence yet of a link to lung cancer and heart disease which claim a total of 200,000 lives a year.

The risk of dying of lung cancer rose by eight per cent for each 10 microgram increase of soot in a cubic metre of air, while the risk of dying of heart disease rose by six per cent.

Larger particles of soot and gaseous pollutants were generally not as harmful, the study found.

Risk factors such as age, smoking, obesity and diet were all taken into account by researchers at New York University School of Medicine.

The experts monitored particles smaller than 2.5 micrometres in cities across the U.S., finding that the average level of pollution was 24 micrograms of particles per cubic meter.

The UK Government is also monitoring levels of the tiny particles at seven key sites.

The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs said levels in central London, on Marylebone Road, were alarmingly high at 29 micrograms per cubic metre.

A site in North Kensington found pollution levels reached 19 micrograms per cubic metre while outside London, Birmingham emerged as the UK's second most polluted city, with 17 micrograms per cubic metre.

Friends of the Earth named ten factories responsible for some 70 per cent of all emissions of lead, benzene and particulates.

It said there had been sizeable reductions over the past three years. But campaigners say the levels are still far too high and a grave cause for concern.

The factory with the largest release of cancer- causing gases is Ineos Chlor in Runcorn, Cheshire. It produces 80 per cent of Britain's chlorine and is a local landmark, with its towers visible for miles.

Another Ineos Chlor plant, on Teesside, came fifth in the league.

Associated Octel's petrol additive factory in Ellesmere Port, Cheshire, was the second worst emitter of recognised carcinogens, although it has cut emissions by twothirds.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

