TITLE	Fresh hope for oesophagal cancer

by AMY ANDERSON, Daily Mail

Recently the actor John Thaw died, aged 60, from oesophagal cancer. Now a new study could have found a simple guard against the risk of what has become the fastest growing cancer in the Western world.

Oesophagal cancer is now the fifth most common cancer in Britain, with the steepest rise in cases among white males aged 50 to 60. Last year, there were 6,920 deaths in the UK from the disease.

Doctors are not sure what has caused this dramatic rise, but a new study could have found a possible link between heartburn and the most common type of oesophagal cancer - adenocarcinoma, a cancer of the lower oesophagus.

Adenocarcinoma is one of two main types of oesophagal cancer, and the type which has seen a dramatic rise in Britain. The second type, squamus cell cancer, has declined steadily in the past ten years, partly due to people quitting smoking.

Adenocarcinoma is caused by a pre- cancerous condition called Barrett's Oesophagus. According to research at Stamford University in Canada, about 10 per cent of people who experience frequent heartburn (caused by stomach acid rising up into the oesophagus) will develop Barrett's Oesophagus. And out of those people, 10 per cent will go on to get adenocarcinoma.

A study being carried out by Dr Rebecca Fitzgerald, a specialist in oesophagal cancer at the Medical Research Council in Cambridge, has found that antacid heartburn remedies could help to guard against the risk of people developing Barrett's Oesophagus.

'We are confident that clinical trials, which begin later this year, will prove our laboratory findings,' says Dr Fitzgerald.

'This is the first study to look into medication for the prevention and treatment of oesophagal cancer. This could be a simple and easy way to protect people from this cancer.

'It is the regular presence of stomach acid in the oesophagus that causes the heightened risk of cancer, so any way that this can be reduced is potentially going to aid people in protecting themselves.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

