TITLE	Why skin cancer rates for women in their 30s have soared by 50 per cent

 By Fiona Macrae Last updated at 1:13 AM on 26th July 2008

Rates of the most deadly form of skin cancer have soared by 50 per cent in women in their 30s. 

The number of patients treated for malignant melanoma  -  blamed on short periods of intensive exposure to the sun  -  has risen by 40 per cent in six years. 

But the sharpest increase in the disease, which claims more than 2,000 lives a year, is among men and women in their 30s. 

For men in this age group the rate has increased by 38 per cent. For women, it has soared by half. 

 The rise in the disease, traditionally diagnosed in the elderly and middle-aged, suggests sunworshipping Britons have ignored warnings about the dangers of UV radiation in pursuit of the perfect suntan. 

 Cheap air fares and an abundance of high street tanning salons mean it has never been easier to top up a tan. 

 In addition, those in their 30s may be starting to reap the legacy of a childhood spent playing outside without the protection of sunscreen. 

 Today's youth may also be more aware of the signs of skin cancer than their older counterparts. 

 Nina Goad, of the British Association of Dermatologists, said: 'One theory for why the UK in particular has such high rates is that we typically overdo our sun exposure and allow our skin to burn when the weather is good, because for much of the year our climate is bleak.' 

 The statistics, from Cancer Research UK, also show that men are more likely to develop the cancer on their chest or back, but the danger areas for women are legs and feet. 

 Recently cancer experts advised women wearing open shoes such as flip-flops and sandals to ensure they apply sunscreen to the exposed skin. 

 In 1998, just 9.2 women in every 100,000 aged between 30 and 39 were diagnosed with malignant melanoma. 

 By 2004, the rate had spiralled to 13.8  -  a rise of 50 per cent. In all, almost 9,000 Britons are diagnosed each year  -  three times as many as in the early 1980s. 

 Health Service figures show that in 2006-2007, a total of 8,202 hospital appointments were made in England for those suffering malignant melanoma. 

 Of the 456 appointments for women in their 30s, 152 were for cancer on the leg or foot, 144 on the back, chest or stomach, 95 on an arm or shoulder, 23 on the face, 13 on the neck and seven on the ear. 

 While women are more likely to be diagnosed with skin cancer, higher numbers of men die from it. 

 Doctors say men have only themselves to blame for being complacent in checking their skin for suspicious moles or growths and being reluctant to seek medical help. 

 Their attitude means that, by the time it becomes obvious that they need help, the cancer is well advanced and less likely to respond to treatment. 

 Those heading for the sun are advised to limit sunbathing to before 11am and after 4pm, when the sun is less intense. Skin should be covered wherever possible and broad spectrum sunscreen applied liberally and regularly. 

 Caroline Cerny, of Cancer Research UK, said: 'People with fair skin, red or blonde hair, lots of freckles and moles or a family history of skin cancer are at increased risk and should take extra care.'

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

