TITLE	I ignored a lump, thinking breastfeeding protected me. Now I'm lucky to be alive

 By Rachel Halliwell Last updated at 6:27 PM on 11th August 2008

 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

When Jayne Goss noticed a small lump as she breastfed her three-month-old son Raphael, she dismissed it as a blocked milk duct and forgot all about it. 

Three months later she finally got it checked out, only to learn she had a highly aggressive form of cancer and would need a double mastectomy. 

'It hadn't occurred to me that this lump could be anything sinister,' says Jayne. 'I was fit and healthy, only 39 years old, and there was no history of breast cancer in my family. 

'Above all, I thought that, because I was breastfeeding and therefore using my breasts for precisely what nature intended, I was somehow safe.' 

Consultant oncologist Alison Jones says this is a common misconception. 'Becoming a mother is such a lovely time in a woman's life, the last thing she expects is to get something as nasty as breast cancer,' she says. 

'So if she finds a lump she's far more likely to dismiss it as hormonal change due to pregnancy or breastfeeding. 

'In most cases she'd be right. Breast cancer is highly unusual in pregnant and breastfeeding women - less than two per cent of diagnoses. Unfortunately, though, when it is cancer I often don't get to see these women until it's quite advanced.' 

This was the case with Jayne, now 41, who discovered her lump in June 2005 but didn't get it checked out until the September. 

She recalls: 'I'd had an email from a 35-year-old friend who was having prophylactic surgery to remove her breasts after genetic tests showed she had an 80 per cent chance of developing breast cancer. 

'On hearing this my husband Ben urged me to get my lump checked out. I still didn't think it was anything to worry about.' 

Jayne, from Oxford, who has two other young sons, was sent for a mammogram and ultrasound scan. 

The ultrasound came back clear but the mammogram showed calcification in the breast tissue, indicative of pre-cancerous changes. 

'The radiographer explained that normal calcification shows up as pinpoints. 

'If there was a problem it would appear as shapes, like triangles. Looking at the scan with him I could see these very clear shapes. I knew then I was in trouble.' 

Four days later the results of a biopsy confirmed pre-cancerous changes of the breast tissue, which would require a double mastectomy. 

'I went to pieces. I couldn't stop crying. I felt as though someone had dropped me into a big black hole and I didn't know how to get out. My whole world had imploded. 

'This was supposed to be such a happy time in my life, as I enjoyed my new baby. Yet here I was fighting a potentially lethal disease. 

'My boys were so tiny. I would climb into bed with them as they slept and it would break my heart as I imagined them growing up without me. On top of everything else I faced the wretched task of having to wean my baby, not because I wanted to but because very soon my breasts would not be there any more.' 

Nature helped in this respect. The shock of the diagnosis meant Jayne's milk production fell away. 

'Each time I fed Raphael felt all the more precious because I knew it might be the last time I had milk for him; and all the more harrowing for the very same reason.' 

Jayne had breastfed her older sons Christian, now seven, and Gabriel, six, for a year each. 

This was another reason she thought she was safe. According to Cancer Research, a woman's risk of breast cancer is lowered by 4.3 per cent for every year that she breastfeeds. 

Clinical breast cancer nurse Antonia Dean says the reason for this is still unclear. 

'It may be that breastfeeding temporarily lowers a woman's oestrogen levels, which is nature's way of delaying the return of menstruation,' she says. 'This means her lifetime exposure to oestrogen, which has been linked with breast cancer, is reduced.' 

Three weeks after her diagnosis, Jayne had a double mastectomy followed by reconstructive surgery, during a five-hour operation. 

As well as pre-cancerous tissue, her surgeon removed a very small tumour, the size of a pea. Tests showed it was a type of breast cancer known as HER2-positive, which is particularly fast growing. 

HER2 is a protein found on the surface of some cancer cells, which encourages them to divide and grow far quicker than other tumours. 

It meant she also needed chemotherapy - eight doses over four months - and was then prescribed the drug Herceptin for a year. Herceptin works by attaching itself to HER2 cells and prevents them growing. 

Last June Jayne had a body scan which showed she was clear of cancer. She has since embarked on a fitness regime, based on power walking, yoga and gym work, to regain her strength. 

Meanwhile, she hopes her story will make for a salutary wake-up call for other women like her. 

'If you find a lump, get it checked out. Thankfully I got treatment in time, so that I can enjoy watching my little boys grow up after all.' 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

