TITLE	Moisturisers used by millions of women every day could increase risk of skin cancer

 By Fiona Macrae Last updated at 9:33 AM on 15th August 2008

Moisturisers used by millions of women every day may raise the risk of skin cancer, scientists have warned. 

In tests, skin creams sped up the development of the most common form of skin cancer and increased the number of tumours and their size. 

The researchers cautioned that the experiments were carried out on mice - but said that the majority of moisturisers have not gone through skin cancer safety checks. 

The study looked at the effect of four moisturisers - Dermabase, Dermovan, Eucerin and Vanicream - on mice primed to develop skin cancer by exposure to UV light. 

Although the creams are mainly used to treat the excessive dryness of eczema, they have a similar formulation to the more common moisturisers used every day by millions of Britons. 

The researchers, from Rutgers University in New Jersey, applied the creams to the animals five days a week for four months. 

The moisturised animals developed non-melanoma skin cancer more quickly than other creatures and had up to twice as many tumours. 

The tumours were also bigger, the Journal of Investigative Dermatology reports. 

However, the application of a custom-made cream, which lacked several ingredients, including mineral oil and the chemical sodium lauryl sulphate, did not affect the tumour development. 

Although non-melanoma skin cancer is the less deadly from of the disease and can usually be easily treated, it can prove fatal. 

Caused by prolonged exposure to the sun, it affects more than 100,000 Britons a year a year and kills 500. 

In contrast, the more deadly malignant melanoma form  - which was not studied - affects almost 9,000 annually and kills 1,800. 

The researchers said that safety tests on moisturisers usually focus on whether they irritate the skin, not whether they cause cancer. 

But they concluded: 'Further studies are needed to determine the effects of widespread use of moisturising creams on the risk of sunlight-induced cancer in humans.' 

Professor Brian Diffey of Newcastle University, also questioned how relevant the research was to human skin.

But he added: 'I am not dismissing the obvious extrapolation of their findings and if some of the constituents of moisturising creams are carcinogenic in humans, further work needs to be done to evaluate the real risk.' 

Jonathan Rees (CORR), professor of dermatology at Edinburgh University said it would be 'crazy' to stop using moisturisers based on the finding. 

'Studies of mouse skin cancer have contributed little to our understanding of human skin cancer,' he said. 

'Non-melanoma cancer in man is very, very common and is almost 100 per cent curable with an operation usually simpler than a tooth filling.' 

Nina Goad, of the British Association of Dermatologists, said: 'If the theory were correct, you would expect to see more of these cancers in women, and on their faces. This is not the case.' 

Dr Kat Arney, of Cancer Research UK, said: 'The key message is to avoid UV radiation from the sun, as this is ultimately the cause of most skin cancers.' 

Moisturisers used by millions of women every day may be increasing their risk of skin cancer, scientists have warned. 

Researchers found mice exposed to UV radiation and treated with skin cream were more likely to develop tumours.

Previous experiments on mice had shown that caffeine, when applied topically or taken orally, acted as a preventative for cancer. 

The scientists, from Rutgers University in New Jersey, had planned to test caffeine as a cancer preventative in humans by adding it to a common moisturiser. 

Before adding the caffeine, they first tested the carcinogenic activity of the moisturiser, Dermabase. 

The shock findings revealed that the moisturiser actually increased the production of tumours in mice that had been exposed to ultraviolet light. 

Further experiments using three other common moisturisers showed an average 69 per cent increase in tumour growth rate.

A newly-created moisturiser, without the ingredients thought to be to blame, did not have the same effect.

The type of skin cancer involved is mostly non-fatal, as opposed to the more dangerous melanoma form of skin cancer, though deaths do occur. 

Despite the findings, Prof Jonathan Rees, grant chair of dermatology at Edinburgh University, said it would be 'crazy' to stop using moisturisers based on a one-off study.

He pointed out that mice have very thin skin and live in the dark, unlike humans, whose bodies are designed for exposure to the sun.

'Studies of mouse skin cancer have contributed little to our understanding of human skin cancer.' he said.

 Nina Goad, of the British Association of Dermatologists, also warned against reading too much into the results. 

She said: 'When it comes to skin cancer, mice are not reliable models for extrapolating what happens in human skin.

'If the theory that applying moisturisers increased the risk of non-melanoma skin cancers were correct, you would expect to see more of these cancers in women, and on their faces.

'This is not the case, so while the research is interesting, I don't think any conclusions should be drawn from it at this stage, and it should not put people off using skin creams if they wish to do so.'

The academics admitted that the significance of their results for humans had not been established. 

In their report, published in the Journal of Investigative Dermatology, they say further studies are needed to determine the effects of the widespread use of moisturising creams on the risk of sunlight-induced skin cancer in humans.

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

