TITLE	Painkillers may cut risk of prostate cancer

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Men who take aspirin and other common painkillers may be cutting their risk of developing prostate cancer, say researchers.

They found men aged 60 and over who took a daily painkiller were half as likely to get the disease and older men got even better protection.

A new U.S. study provides further evidence of the preventive health benefits of drugs known collectively as non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).

Daily aspirin is already recommended to prevent second heart attacks and strokes, and there is mounting research evidence which suggests NSAIDs have a protective effect against cancers of the oesophagus, bladder, breast and bowel.

It is thought painkillers work by reducing inflammation which has been linked to cancerous tissue changes. The latest study by Mayo Clinic researchers looked at 1,362 white men in Minnesota aged 60-plus over five and half years.

Some were given a regular dose of NSAIDs such as aspirin and ibuprofen while the remainder were not.

The researchers found 4 per cent of those who took the drugs developed prostate cancer compared with 9 per cent of those who were not treated. The older the patient, the more pronounced the protective effect of the drugs.

Researcher Rosebud Roberts, writing in the journal Mayo Clinic Proceedings, warned that the results needed confirmation before doctors could advise millions of elderly men to take NSAIDs regularly.

It was too early to recommend that people start taking over-the-counter drugs in a bid to ward off cancer, she said.

Too many people would suffer sideeffects, such as gastro-intestinal haemorrhage which can be lifethreatening for some users.

Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer in men, after lung cancer, and every hour in the UK one man dies of the disease.

It mainly affects older men but is becoming more common in younger age groups and worryingly, over the next decade its incidence is predicted to rise considerably to overtake that of lung and breast cancer.

There are over 21,000 cases reported each year and about 10,000 deaths.

There is no consensus among doctors about how to avoid getting the disease, although eating fatty fish such as salmon and mackerel regularly has been found to reduce the risk.

Regular use of anti-inflammatory painkillers for long periods of time has also been found to give protection against developing Alzheimer's disease in later life.

Between five and eight million Britons take prescribed NSAID painkillers including ibuprofen, naproxen and diclofenac, usually to combat arthritis.

Up to two million Britons take over-the-counter NSAIDs such as aspirin or Nurofen on a regular basis without prescription.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

