TITLE	Traditional full English fry-up 'may raise risk of bowel cancer by 63 per cent', say scientists

 By Sam Greenhill Last updated at 1:12 PM on 26th August 2008

The traditional English breakfast has long suffered a reputation for being a 'heart attack on a plate' with its high fat and calorie content. 

Now those who still regularly enjoy tucking into a fry-up have something else to worry about  -  a 63 per cent higher risk of bowel cancer. 

Yesterday researchers warned that sausages, bacon and other processed meat increase the risk of the disease, as well as being fatty and high in cholesterol. 

 

The evidence is strong enough that we should avoid eating such food as much as possible, said the World Cancer Research Fund. 

The extra calories can also lead to obesity, which is linked to many types of cancer and heart disease. 

According to the charity, there is convincing scientific evidence that excess body fat is linked to six types of cancer, including bowel cancer and breast cancer. 

Experts believe that  -  after not smoking  -  maintaining a healthy weight is the most important factor in helping to avoid suffering from the disease. 

The WCRF warned that eating 150g of processed meat a day  -  equivalent to about two sausages and three rashers of bacon  -  increases bowel cancer risk by 63 per cent. 

   More... Eating two eggs a day could CUT your cholesterol 

Professor Martin Wiseman, medical and scientific adviser for the WCRF, said: 'For some people, having a fry-up with bacon and sausages might seem like a good way to start the day. 

'But if you are doing this regularly, then you are significantly increasing your risk of bowel cancer, which is one of the most common cancers in the UK. 

'Only a third of people are aware of the link between processed meat and cancer. 

'This means two-thirds are not in a position to make an informed choice about how much of it they eat.' 

He warned that it is a simple matter of the more processed meat a person eats, the higher the risk. 

Professor Wiseman said: 'This is not a question of all or nothing. 

'For example, if you eat 150g of it a day, then you will be increasing your bowel cancer risk by about two-thirds. 

'But if you only eat 50g a day  -  roughly the equivalent of a sausage  -  then you will be increasing your risk by about a fifth. 

'As well as the processed meat increasing the risk of bowel cancer, fry-ups also tend to be high in calories. 

'We recommend people limit consumption of high- calorie, or energy- dense, foods because eating them regularly makes you more likely to gain weight. 

'This is important because there is convincing evidence that excess body fat increases the risk of six types of cancer.' 

Professor Wiseman said scientists estimate that about a third of cancers could be prevented by eating healthily, taking regular exercise and maintaining a healthy weight. 

In terms of overall risk, the chances of developing bowel cancer are one in 18 for men and one in 20 for women in the UK. 

Scientists do not fully understand why processed meats increase the risk of cancer but it could be due to the chemical reactions that occur during their preparation. 

Such reactions could produce carcinogenic chemicals, such as heterocyclic amines or polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. 

The traditional fried English breakfast came about during the Industrial Revolution, when working men downed 3,000 calories  -  but burned them off by lunchtime. 

They are far less popular than they once were, but remain standard fare at workers' cafes and motorway service stations. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

