TITLE	Britain's youngest Asbestos victim dies at 28: Did she contract it at school?

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 2:42 PM on 31st August 2008

 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

The woman who has just become Britain's youngest victim of a rare form of cancer could have contracted the disease at school.

Leigh Carlisle, 28, lost her two-year battle against the killer disease mesothelioma on Wednesday. 

It is believed she must have been exposed to asbestos - almost always the cause of the cancer - as a child. 

The illness is usually suffered by older people and lawyers working with Leigh were investigating the cause long before her death. 

Adrian Budgen from Irwin Mitchell, a law firm specialising in industrial disease, said: 'There is a big issue about asbestos in schools built in the post-war period.

'When doors are slammed by young children or chairs are pushed against pipes, it can disturb the asbestos. This may have happened to Leigh.'

The company is awaiting a response to a Freedom of Information request about the buildings where Leigh was taught as a youngster. 

It is also looking at the possibility Leigh breathed in deadly fibres as she walked passed a factory yard, where asbestos sheets were cut up, on her way to school.

Leigh, a phone company executive, believed this was where she must have been exposed. 

In an interview last year, recalling her devastation at being diagnosed, she said: 'I was 26 and thought I was invincible and it was the last thing I expected them to tell me.

'When you hear the word cancer you think 'that's it'. I never thought it would happen to me.

'I only walked through the factory yard as a short cut to my class. I used to walk there with my cousins, auntie and mother. 

'Thankfully they are all fine but there is no other place where I could have been exposed to asbestos.'

It is also thought she could have breathed in asbestos from the clothes of relatives who worked at the factory. 

The lawyers are still hoping to secure compensation for her family.

Mesothelioma is usually associated with people over 50 and men working in shipyards and construction in the 1960s and 1970s are most at risk. 

It generally has an incubation period of between 20 to 50 years - with patients usually only surviving up to 12 months.

Leigh suffered a rare form of the disease - Peritoneal, which attacks the lining of the abdomen. 

Her case has been turned into a medical mystery as her liver and lungs were clear.

Leigh also explained in the interview last year: 'Doctors said this is really, really rare - a one in a million chance. 

 

'It was the worst feeling in the world. I have taken a positive approach and I'm just getting on with my life as best I can.'

She battled with the illness for 18 months but died at North Manchester Hospital General Hospital last week with her boyfriend by her side. 

Paying tribute to his partner, Michael Price said: 'Leigh had so much courage and strength. She was an inspiration to me and to others.' 

In a statement her parents, Sheila and Mark, sister Sarah and niece Bella, said: 'Leigh is still very much a part of our family and always a treasured daughter, sister and auntie. Everyone is so proud of her.' 

Leigh went to Propps Hall Primary School in Failsworth until 1991 and walked through the Hubron rubber factory yard.

She began to suffer from growing stomach pains during her final year at Derby University where she was studying a three year marketing and Spanish degree.

Various hospitals gave her a range of diagnoses including Irritable Bowel Syndrome, pelvic infection and Endometriosis over three years. 

But she was finally referred to North Manchester General and in January last year was diagnosed with Peritoneal. 

Mesothelioma, which attacks the thin membrane that lines the chest and abdomen, is one of the most agressive forms of cancer. 

About 2,000 people die from it in Britain die each year, a figure which has doubled since 1992. 

It is believed 90,000 more people in this country will die from the disease and that a further 90,000 will die from other lung diseases related to asbestos exposure. 

About 200 schools workers have died or are suffering serious illness because of asbestos in schools. It is estimated about 13,000 schools still contain asbestos. 

At the time of her death Leigh was trying to raise awareness about her condition. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

