TITLE	Fatal cancer risk for men with high blood calcium levels say US researchers

 Last updated at 4:02 PM on 3rd September 2008

Men with increased levels of calcium in their blood may have a much higher risk of getting fatal prostate cancer, US researchers said today.

Their findings indicate a simple blood test may identify men at high risk for the most dangerous prostate tumours. And the good news is that there are already drugs available that cut calcium levels in the blood.

The researchers tracked 2,814 men in a government health survey in which they gave blood samples that revealed their calcium levels.

The men in the top third of blood calcium levels had 2.68 times the risk of developing fatal prostate cancer later in life compared to those in the bottom third, the study found. 

'If serum calcium really does increase your risk for fatal prostate cancer, that's wonderfully exciting because serum calcium levels can be changed,' said Gary Schwartz of Wake Forest University School of Medicine, who helped lead the study. 

 'One way to think of it is to think of the tremendous advances in the control of cardiovascular disease that occur from understanding that things like serum cholesterol predict heart attack,' Mr Schwartz added.

 Doctors have struggled to find ways to predict if a man who gets prostate cancer will have a tumour that poses little danger, as is often the case, or one that is a killer.

 Blood calcium was not very predictive of whether a man would get non-lethal prostate cancer, but strongly indicated whether a man would get a fatal case, the researchers discovered.

 Prostate cancer is the second most commonly diagnosed form of cancer in men worldwide, with about 780,000 men diagnosed per year.

Mr Schwartz said it is unclear whether it is the actual calcium or blood levels of parathyroid hormone - which is supposed to keep calcium levels at normal levels in the bloodstream - that is raising the risk.

 Either way, he said there are drugs that can lower them. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

