TITLE	Dentist who told mouth cancer victim to gargle with Listerine allowed to carry on practising

 Last updated at 1:46 AM on 9th September 2008

A dentist who told a patient suffering from mouth cancer to gargle with mouthwash will be allowed to continue in practice. 

Nalin Dhamecha told Robin Read, 44, there was 'nothing untoward' with the ulcer on his tongue - but months later he was dead. 

The General Dental Council yesterday decided to allow Mr Dhamecha to continue to practise, subject to conditions, adding that his actions did not contribute to Mr Read's death. 

Mr Read's widow Liz said: 'If he had been referred to a specialist and diagnosed, Robin's chances would have been so much greater.' 

The father-of-one went to Aberdeen House Dental Practice in Grayshott, Surrey, on two occasions in May 2006 and was told to use Bonjela and Listerine to soothe the pain

His ulcer had still not healed by October that year, so he booked another appointment with Mr Dhamecha, who told him there was 'nothing untoward'. 

Within weeks, a large swelling appeared on his neck, and in December he was diagnosed with cancer at the Royal Surrey Hospital. 

He died on July 29, 2007. 

Mrs Read wept as she told the hearing: 'I can't begin to tell you what that man went through.

'The inside of his mouth was burnt to a crisp because of the radiotherapy.  

 'He suffered more pain and agony than any human being should ever have to suffer. He couldn't eat or drink. He was a skeleton.

'He was in a hospice for the last three weeks where he was given the best treatment and care imaginable but by the end his face had just collapsed.'  

She added: 'Robin trusted professionals because he expected people to trust his professionalism in his expertise. He would not easily accept anybody telling him something different.'  

The GDC panel members ruled that it was 'not unreasonable' for Dhamecha to assume the ulcer had been caused by a faulty denture after the two initial appointments in May, and accepted that he had examined Mr Read's lymph nodes. 

But they found that his failure to realise it had not healed, or to make an urgent referral to a specialist on re-examination on October 16 and 20 amounted to misconduct.

Dr Gibson told Dhamecha: 'The committee feels that in regard to sanctions, it is entitled to give significant weight to your excellent practice both before and after 2006, the fact that the GDC accepts that you pose no risk to patients, that you are a dedicated and valuable member of the dental profession and your community, and the fact that you are, by your own admission, devastated by your failure.'

However, he also told Dhamecha: 'You failed to observe what was a significant lesion in Mr Read's tongue.

'These were serious omissions which, whilst not causing or contributing to his death, impacted on and breached the duty of the profession to protect patients from harm.' 

 Dhamecha will now be able to continue in practice, as long as he attends a minimum of 10 hours of courses on identifying potentially malignant lesions.

He will also be required to keep a log book on the management of patients with oral problems such as lesions for the next 12 months.

Mrs Read, 52, who now lives near Leeds, and has two children from a previous relationship, said she was bitterly disappointed with the decision of the GDC.

'At the moment I just feel cheated. My husband has been cheated of his life. The whole thing stinks.

'Robin should have been given a chance but Dhamecha took that chance away from him.

'I don't think he should have been struck off. He has children and I would not like him to lose his livelihood. I would have hoped he would have been given a suspension that would have given him time to think.'  

Mrs Read, who nursed her husband throughout his ordeal, said she is only beginning to come to terms with his death now the case is over.

'I just feel totally devastated,' she said.

'He is getting a second chance which is more than he gave Robin.

'It seems a few tears and some breast beating have persuaded the committee to give the dentist the benefit of the doubt, and the only person who could have hammered the final nail into his coffin is not here to speak up for himself.'

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

