TITLE	'I've had skin cancer... but I won't stop using sunbeds,' addicted girl's defiant vow

 By Rebecca Camber Last updated at 12:36 AM on 9th September 2008 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

At 15 Zara Hovelsas started using sunbeds every day. Now 27, you would think she should know better. Especially as she has been diagnosed with skin cancer. 

But Miss Hovelsas insists she can't help herself. Six months after having her cancerous moles removed, she is back on a sunbed once a week  -  despite doctors warning it could result in the cancer returning. 

She acknowledges she is risking her life but says she can't bear to be pale.

 

'People will probably think I'm silly to risk my life for a tan but I can't help myself,' she said. 

'I'm frightened the cancer will return but I tell myself I'll be OK if I just tan once in a while and keep checking out my moles. 

'That way, if it comes back I can catch it in time. Fingers crossed, anyway.' 

Miss Hovelsas, of Kilburn, North London, works as a gemologist, evaluating gemstones. 

Evaluating her chances of getting cancer must have been a rather more simple matter. A grandfather died of the disease and her mother recently battled skin cancer as well.

 

She started her tanning habit in earnest at 15. After admiring comments from friends, she was soon visiting salons five times a week. On her 18th birthday she asked her parents for her own sunbed. 

Her mother June, 49, a retired nurse, warned her not to use it more than twice a week. Instead she was on it twice a day. 

'I became addicted,' she told Closer magazine. 

'I never thought about the consequences. Even though I had heard about the dangers, I didn't take them seriously.' 

Then three years ago her mother had two cancerous moles removed from her back and leg. 

'I was devastated when mum developed cancer,' Miss Hovelsas said. 'But it didn't stop me from tanning. I presumed it was because she has fair skin and I thought I'd be fine because my skin is naturally darker. 

'I told myself it wasn't going to happen to me.' 

It was in November last year that Miss Hovelsas noticed a dark spot on her left thigh. 

Eventually she made an appointment at The Mole Clinic in London where she was told it was probably cancerous. 

'I was so scared, I couldn't stop crying. I was cursing myself and just thought "You stupid girl, you only have yourself to blame". 

'If I'd left it, the cancer would have spread and killed me. 

'Luckily it was caught in time, so I didn't need chemotherapy. 

'The doctor confirmed that the cancer was aggravated by sunbathing and using sunbeds and added there was strong chance it could return. I swore I'd never use a sunbed again.' 

For a few months after her operation in January to remove the cancerous mole on her thigh and two less dangerous ones on her back, Miss Hovelsas tried fake tanning. But she gave up when friends commented that she was not as brown as usual. 

She began using sunbeds again three months ago after a holiday in France. 

'It felt so amazing to be brown again,' she said. 'I couldn't bear the thought of losing my colour, so I booked myself a sunbed session, I felt really guilty. 

'I know it might kill me in the end, but I just can't stop.'

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

