TITLE	As one trial suggests a link with cancer, are statins a cause for concern?

 By Dr Ellie Cannon Last updated at 10:21 PM on 6th September 2008

 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

Thousands of people in the UK on statins will have been alarmed by a recent small scientific trial that revealed a slight increase in the number of cancer cases in patients taking a combination of statin and another fat-lowering drug, ezetimibe, known as Inegy. 

It is still unclear whether this research is significant as the trial was so small. 

Much larger trials following people on statins have not shown any increase in cancer risk - even after a decade. 

Here are some of the questions I'm most frequently asked about statins. 

 Q: Who is prescribed them? 

A: Anyone with a high cholesterol level should be considered for a statin. They are prescribed in two main situations: first, if you have a family tendency to high cholesterol, putting you at risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD); second, if you are a high risk for other reasons, for example, if you are diabetic, have suffered a heart attack or have a combination of risk factors such as high blood pressure, angina, obesity and smoking. 

 Q: Should I be worried if I'm prescribed them? 

A: Being prescribed them means your doctor is concerned you have an increased chance of a stroke or heart attack. It is important to discuss this with your GP so you can understand why and what else you can do to help. 

 Q: Are there any long-term side effects? 

A: Statins can affect your liver and your GP will monitor this with blood tests every year. Muscle and tummy pains are not uncommon. Patients can sometimes get more serious muscle problems and you should tell your doctor if you have any new muscle pain or weakness. 

 Q: Will I have to take it for ever? 

A: In most cases, treatment with a statin is lifelong. In some cases, diet and exercise can dramatically improve your cholesterol to such a degree you could stop taking them. 

 Q: Can you request them? 

A: Yes, you can ask your doctor for statins. If a fasting cholesterol blood test shows your level was high, or you fell into one of the categories above, your doctor would certainly recommend them. 

Q: Why are some children prescribed them? 

A: In families with very high cholesterol, controlling it in childhood reduces the risk of CVD in adulthood. These children may be given statins by a specialist but only after trying dietary changes and providing they are aged over ten. 

 Q: Why do some doctors think statins are a miracle medicine? 

A: Heart disease is a huge cause of illness and death, so any drug that helps prevent it is regarded as a miracle. The scientific evidence showing statins prevent heart attacks, particularly in those who've had one before, is compelling, and they seem to help even if your cholesterol wasn't high in the first place. 

 Q: Is there a natural alternative? 

A: Modifying your diet to reduce saturated fat and increase soluble fibre and oily fish intake is a natural alternative. This is typically described as a Mediterranean diet.

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

