TITLE	There is no such thing as a safe tan, warn skin cancer experts

 By Jenny Hope Last updated at 11:40 PM on 18th September 2008

 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

There is no such thing as a 'safe' tan - especially from indoor tanning beds, warn researchers. 

Using the beds damages skin, often leading to premature ageing and skin cancer, including the most deadly form, malignant melanoma. 

Studies in the U.S. found that tanning and skin cancer both begin with DNA damage caused by exposure to ultraviolet radiation.

 

 

This means that achieving a 'safe' tan with UV radiation may be impossible, according to a series of papers in the journal Pigment Cell  and  Melanoma Research. 

They call for a ban on the use of sunbeds by under-18s, along with publicity which claims the beds are safe. 

Dr David Fisher, a dermatologist and president of the Society of Melanoma Research, said: 'Whereas genetic and other factors undoubtedly contribute importantly to skin cancer risk, the role of UV is incontrovertible, and efforts to confuse the public, particularly for purposes of economic gain by the indoor tanning industry, should be vigorously combated for the public health.' 

Three million Britons regularly use sunbeds despite concerns about the health risks. The number of cases of malignant melanoma has risen to almost 9,000 a year, with 1,800 deaths, making it the most common cancer in young adults aged 15 to 34. More than 100 deaths from skin cancer every year in the UK are thought to be linked to the use of sunbeds. 

A previous study has already revealed a 75 per cent higher risk of melanoma for people who first used a sunbed before the age of 35. 

The Government is considering banning under-18s from using sunbeds in England and Wales - a measure which has already been agreed in Scotland. 

Under proposals by the Health and Safety Executive, children under 18 will be banned from using sunbeds and salons will have to be staffed at all times. 

The HSE is reviewing its 1995 guidance on sunbeds at the request of the Department of Health, which is concerned about a lack of regulation in the industry. 

A spokesman for the Department of Health said: 'The Government strongly discourages the use of sunbeds for cosmetic purposes - especially by minors. Firstly, we propose gathering more information about the number and distribution of sunbeds and the scale of sunbed use by young people. 

'The Health and Safety Executive has also recently consulted on revised guidance for sunbed salon operators and users and will be considering the responses in consultation with the Department of Health.'        

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

