TITLE	Four university workers 'killed by radiation from 100-year-old experiments by nuclear pioneer Ernest Rutherford'

 By Jaya Narain Last updated at 8:08 AM on 24th September 2008

 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

Radiation from experiments at a university 100 years ago is suspected of causing a cluster of cancer deaths. 

Three academics and an assistant have died after working in the laboratory used by Ernest Rutherford at the start of the 20th century. 

The Nobel prizewinner is known to have experimented with radon at the Manchester University facility. 

The Health and Safety Executive is overseeing an investigation into whether contamination by the radioactive gas was a factor in the four deaths, the last of which came last week. 

The laboratory is also known to have contained quantities of polonium - the substance used to kill Russian dissident Alexander Litvinenko in November 2006. 

Radioactive material is highly dangerous and can remain so for thousands of years. 

The academics who died all worked for the university's psychology department, which moved into the building in 1972 after it was vacated by the physics faculty. 

Hugh Wagner, who died last year at 62 of pancreatic cancer, spent 20 years working in the same room that Rutherford used in 1908.

 

Dr Wagner's colleague, Dr John Clark, who worked in the room directly below, died of a brain tumour in 1992. 

This February, Vanessa Santos-Leitao, 25, a computer assistant who worked in the building from 2006, died of a brain tumour. 

And last week, Dr Arthur Reader, 69, who worked in the psychology department between 1965 and 1993, died of pancreatic cancer.

The father- of-four's family have made no comment, but in the days before his death Dr Reader's wife Grace said his illness 'seemed more than a coincidence'. 

The university ordered a decontamination exercise at the Rutherford Building in 1999, but said this was a precautionary measure only and that tests had failed to reveal dangerous levels of radiation. 

The Health and Safety Executive says its readings also show the building to be safe. 

The probe it is overseeing was requested by the university and will be carried out by an independent body. 

An inquest will be held to establish whether Dr Reader's cancer was caused by substances he was exposed to at the university.

Manchester coroner Nigel Meadows said: 'I'm going to open an inquest and have a post-mortem examination to determine whether or not his death was unnatural - that is, whether or not he was exposed to anything during the course of his employment that may have caused or contributed to the cancer.'

There may also be an investigation into the death of Miss Santos-Leitao after her death from a brain tumour earlier this year. 

A university spokesman said: 'We believe the evidence presented to date does not support a connection between the deaths of former staff and possible exposure to radioactive contamination. 

'It is important to stress that we do not believe there to be any risk to current occupants of the Rutherford Building.' 

Three of the university's psychologists - John Churcher, Don O'Boyle and Neil Todd - were so worried about the deaths that they launched their own investigation. 

The trio, who also work in the Rutherford Building, published their findings on the internet in June. 

They admitted they could find no direct evidence of a link between radioactive contamination and the death of their colleagues.

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

