TITLE	Drug prevents one in three breast cancers

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Taking the drug tamoxifen every day for five years can cut the risk of developing breast cancer by a third, a British study has found.

It is the most conclusive proof yet that tamoxifen can prevent breast cancer in women at high risk.

But doctors warn that the pill triggers serious side effects - including cancer of the womb and life-threatening blood clots - and further research is needed to see if there is an overall benefit.

Professor Jack Cuzick of Cancer Research UK, who led the study involving 7,000 women from Britain and five other countries, said the results prove the cancer is preventable.

Speaking yesterday at the third European Breast Cancer Conference in Barcelona, he said: 'We know if you want to prevent lung cancer, don't smoke cigarettes. We can prevent breast cancer by controlling oestrogen levels and tamoxifen will do that.'

The drug blocks the effect of the hormone oestrogen, which is believed to help tumours grow.

Tamoxifen has been used to treat breast cancer for more than 20 years and has saved the lives of hundreds of thousands of women worldwide.

It no longer has a patent and, at 8p a day, is a very cheap treatment.

It can also cut the risk of breast cancer survivors developing the disease in the other breast by up to 45 per cent.

This led to trials being carried out to see if it would protect healthy women who never had breast cancer.

The latest research, part of the International Breast Cancer Intervention Study, tested tamoxifen on women considered at high risk of breast cancer because of a family history of the disease.

There were 33 per cent fewer breast cancers among high-risk women taking tamoxifen compared with those taking an inactive pill.

Professor Cuzick said three previous prevention studies had been carried out. An American trial showed a 50 per cent reduction, but two European trials found hardly any reduction.

'With our data, we can say with certainty there is a 30 to 40 per cent reduction in breast cancer cases from using tamoxifen,' he said.

'For high-risk women, we calculate that deaths from breast cancer within ten years of diagnosis would be reduced by 18 per cent.'

But he added: 'The risks are equally balanced with the benefits and we need to complete the study to see if women will benefit.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

