TITLE	Now HRT can REDUCE the risk of breast cancer in women

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 8:37 AM on 25th September 2008

Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) can reduce the risk of breast cancer by as much as 42 per cent, researchers have revealed.

HRT, which is used to treat post-menopausal women, appears to reduce the risk for those with a certain genetic mutation linked to the disease.

The researchers looked at hormone replacement therapy or HRT in post-menopausal women with a BRCA1 gene mutation, which greatly increases their chances of developing breast cancer.

Among 472 women from nine countries, those who used HRT were 42 per cent less likely to develop breast cancer than those who did not, according to the research by Dr Steven Narod of Women's College Hospital in Toronto . 

 Many women with a BRCA1 mutation choose to have their ovaries removed in order to reduce their risk of getting breast cancer, but the operation brings on the menopause. HRT can relieve menopausal symptoms such as hot flashes and night sweats. 

 Earlier studies raised alarms about HRT because it raised the risk of breast cancer, stroke and other heart conditions. 

 But the impact on the risk of breast cancer in post-menopausal women with a BRCA1 gene mutation had been unclear, Narod's team reported in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute.

 Narod said the findings should reassure women with the mutation who want to have their ovaries removed before menopause to lower their risk of getting breast or ovarian cancer, but are worried about using HRT to relieve the symptoms that will follow. 

'Certainly in my practice in Toronto at Women's College Hospital, I have no hesitance whatsoever in prescribing hormone replacement therapy to young women who have a BRCA1 mutation and surgical menopause,' Narod said. 

   More... Cancer and heart disease scares 'put one million women off HRT a year' HRT helps insomnia, aching joints and sex-life in women - even years after the menopause, say scientists 

'We want to be able to get the benefit of the ovariectomy in terms of preventing cancer but maintain the best quality of life. And we think that the best way to maintain the quality of life is to use hormone replacement therapy,' he added. 

 Hormone replacement therapy can involve estrogen alone or estrogen along with progesterone or progestin, a synthetic hormone with effects like those of progesterone. 

Narod found no difference in risk reduction between estrogen-only or estrogen-progesterone hormone therapies. 

 Not everyone was convinced. Two experts who wrote a commentary in the same journal accompanying the study said the findings 'provide some evidence for safety but are insufficient to reliably inform routine clinical practice.'

 'As a result, continued caution in prescribing hormone therapy to women with BRCA1 mutations who are at high risk for breast cancers remains prudent,' Dr Rowan Chlebowski of the University of California and Ross Prentice of the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Centre wrote. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

