TITLE	Cancer alert over talc: Women using powder every day 'are at risk'

 By Pat Hagan Last updated at 1:11 AM on 27th September 2008

Women who use talcum powder every day to keep fresh are 40 per cent more likely to develop ovarian cancer, according to alarming research. 

Scientists fear powder particles applied to the private parts may travel to the ovaries and trigger a process of inflammation that allows cancer cells to flourish. 

Although previous studies have raised concerns over talc, the latest findings from the U.S. suggest that the risks are much greater than first thought.

Now the researchers have urged all women to stop using talc immediately. 

Experts from Harvard Medical School in Boston studied more than 3,000 women. 

They discovered using talc just once a week raised the risk of cancer by 36 per cent, rising to 41 per cent for those applying powder every day. 

The study also revealed that the risks were greater still for those with a certain genetic profile. 

Women carrying a gene called glutathione S-transferase M1, or GSTM1, but lacking a gene called glutathione S-transferase T1 ( GSTT1), were nearly three times as likely to develop tumours. 

 

Around one in ten Caucasian women are thought to have this genetic profile, putting them at sharply increased risk. 

Talc is made from a soft mineral called hydrous magnesium silicate, which is found throughout the world. 

It is crushed, dried and milled to produce powder used in cosmetic products by millions. Some experts say it has chemical similarities to asbestos, which can cause a deadly form of lung cancer. 

The findings, published in the journal Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and Prevention, apply only to talcum powder used around the private parts, not on the rest of the body. 

Laboratory tests show ovarian cells exposed to talc divide more rapidly  -  a characteristic sign of cancer.

But until recently there was no proof that powder could travel through a woman's reproductive tract as far as the pelvis and then on to the ovaries. 

However, last year, a separate group of doctors at Harvard Medical School identified tiny particles of powder in the pelvis of a 68-year-old woman with advanced ovarian cancer who had used talc every day for 30 years. 

More than 6,000 women a year in the UK are diagnosed with cancer of the ovaries. 

The main risk factors include a family history of the disease, having already had breast cancer and starting periods at a young age. 

Women who are overweight or use hormone replacement therapy are also thought to be more at risk. 

Dr Maggie Gates, who led the study, said that until the outcome of further research women should avoid using talc in the genital area. An alternative is cornstarch powder. 

Dr Jodie Moffat of Cancer Research UK said: 'It's important to remember that very few women who use talcum powder will ever develop ovarian cancer.' 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

