TITLE	Bigger and taller baby girls 'have higher risk of breast cancer', says study

 By Fiona Macrae Last updated at 1:19 AM on 30th September 2008

Big or tall baby girls are more likely to develop breast cancer when they grow up, research suggests.

Each extra pound at birth or 2cm increase in length raises a woman's chances of the deadly disease by 6 per cent.

It is thought that hormones which drive growth in the womb could alter the programming of the breast, making it more susceptible to the cancer which kills more than 1,000 British women a month.

Big babies could also go through puberty early - another factor linked to an increased risk of breast cancer.

The researchers, from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, examined the results of 32 studies involving more than 600,000 women.

Most lived in developed countries and more than 22,000 had developed breast cancer.

   More... Traces of toxic anti-cancer drugs in tap water could prove fatal to unborn babies 

The analysis showed a clear link between their weight at birth and their odds of developing the disease in later life.

Every extra pound raised the risk of the cancer, which affects more than 45,000 British women a year, by a factor of 6 per cent.

Length also has an effect, with each 2cm increase in a baby's length also shortening the odds of contracting the disease by 6 per cent.

The links held when other factors, such as a woman's weight in adulthood, were taken into account, the journal PLoS Medicine reports.

It is important to note that the overall effect of baby size on a woman's chances of developing breast cancer is small.

For instance, if you looked at 100 babies weighing less than 5lb 8oz, ten would be expected to develop breast cancer by the age of 80. 

In a similar group of 100 babies weighing 8lb 13oz and above, there would be an average of 11.6 cases of the disease.

Researcher Professor Isobel dos Santos Silva said: 'Our study indicates that birth size is a marker of susceptibility to breast cancer in adulthood, at least in developed countries.

'Little is known on how the prenatal environment may affect breast cancer risk in later life. Further research is needed.'

A better understanding of the biology behind the phenomenon could lead to new drugs to beat the disease.

In an accompanying article, U.S. experts said that while the increased risk might seem small, it was 'not trivial for a common disease like breast cancer'.

Dr Sarah Cant, of Breakthrough Breast Cancer, said: 'Breast cancer is a complex disease that can be influenced by many factors throughout a woman's life. It is very interesting that birth size may be one of them.

'Although there is nothing a woman can do about her size at birth, there are some things she can do to help reduce her risk of developing breast cancer such as maintaining a healthy weight, eating a balanced diet and limiting her alcohol intake.'

Dr Jodie Moffat, of Cancer Research UK, said: 'Breast cancer remains the most common cancer in the UK but regardless of birth weight it's important for all women to be breast-aware and go for screening when invited.' 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

