TITLE	Long-term Pill use may raise cervical cancer risks

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Women who take the Pill for five years or longer may double their risk of getting cervical cancer, say researchers.

It is the first time using the Pill has been firmly linked to a higher risk of cancer of the cervix, which claims the lives of 1,300 women in Britain each year.

The findings of the authoritative review by the World Health Organisation are likely to deepen concerns over long-term threats to women's health posed by oral contraceptives.

Last night, however, British experts said Pill users should not panic because any increase in risk has been offset by the UK's cervical screening programme, which has cut the number developing the disease.

They also pointed out that the Pill, which is used by three million women in Britain, protects against fatal cancers of the ovaries and womb lining.

The WHO convened a 20-strong panel of international experts, including British specialists, earlier this month to review studies over the past 30 years.

The panel also considered new evidence from two multi-national studies for the International Agency for Research on Cancer, to be published in The Lancet tomorrow.

Professor Philip Hannaford, professor of primary care at Aberdeen University and a member of the panel, said it had agreed for the first time that a causal link between the Pill and cervical cancer was 'likely'.

The review found the risk could be doubled for some Pill users.

Previously, experts were unclear whether a possible link was due to other factors, such as age of first sexual experience, number of sexual partners, smoking and childbearing history rather than the Pill itself.

The review appears to conclude that using the Pill does put women at risk.

This may be because they are vulnerable to catching a sexually transmitted infection called the human papilloma virus (HPV) - the main cause of cervical cancer - through unprotected sex.

Condoms reduce the risk of getting HPV because they provide a physical barrier to its transmission.

Although having HPV is essential as a primary cause of cervical cancer, other factors are needed to promote development of the disease. For example, smoking is known to trigger the process in women with HPV.

The WHO now concludes that the Pill may be one of those factors.

Dr Timothy Farley, of the WHO's department of reproductive health and research in Geneva, said: 'We now have more clarity on some of the other factors - they seem to be less likely as explanations.'

The WHO review comes days after a study found that taking oral contraceptives for many years is linked to a higher risk of breast cancer than previously thought. Women who have taken the Pill are 26 per cent more likely to develop breast cancer.

Professor Hannaford stressed, however, that longterm use of the Pill halved the risk of developing 'more nasty' cancers of the ovaries and womb lining. 'We don't want to start another Pill scare,' he told the GPs' newspaper Pulse.

Prof Hannaford said women on the Pill were not at high risk of cervical cancer as long as they continued to have regular smear tests.

Rates of full-blown cancer have halved over the last 30 years - but without screening they would have more than doubled.

Professor Gordon McVie, joint director general of Cancer Research UK, said screening has made cervical cancer a rare disease.

'Women should not be overly worried by the findings of this review,' he said. 'It is important they attend their screening appointments which will pick up any changes long before they develop into cancer.'

He said HPV infection must be recognised and tackled as the main cause of cervical cancer, adding: 'You can't get HPV from the Pill no matter how many tablets you take.'

Dr Anne Szarewski, clinical consultant at Cancer Research UK, said the WHO tended to look at developing countries where risk factors were not the same as in developed countries.

A British study had found no link between the Pill and cervical cancer. 'It may also be relevant that in developing countries fewer women have used the Pill and may not be representative of the population,' she said.

'Other research in developed countries has tended to show smoking is more important than the Pill.'

A spokesman for the Family Planning Association said: 'The overall likelihood of getting cervical cancer in the UK is low whether you use the Pill for a long time or not.

'This country has a highly effective screening programme for cervical cancer which has proved successful in reducing both the occurrence of the disease and deaths from it.'

A Department of Health spokesman said: 'There is no reason based on research for women to stop using the Pill.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

