TITLE	Jab or pill vaccine for breast cancer 'on the horizon' says British expert

 By Daniel Martin Last updated at 1:58 AM on 7th October 2008

A breast cancer vaccine that mimics the effects of hormonal changes in childbirth and breast-feeding is on the horizon, according to an expert. 

Professor Valerie Beral of Oxford University said drugs in the form of a jab or pill could be a possibility as more is known about the disease. 

But she accused the scientists of ignoring research on how to prevent breast cancer. 

A growing number of studies have pointed towards to the conclusion that breast-feeding can reduce the risk of breast cancer. 

Last month, a study by the World Cancer Research Fund found that mothers who breastfed for a year over their lifetime were almost 5 per cent less likely to develop the disease than those who did not. 

Women in western countries who tend to have small families have a far higher breast cancer risk than those in rural parts of Asia with large families. 

The UK has one of the lowest rates of breast-feeding in Europe, with two thirds of new mothers attempting it compared with 98 per cent in Sweden. 

Professor Beral, director of Oxford University's cancer epidemiology unit, told the National Cancer Research Institute's annual conference in Birmingham that scientists were spending too much time trying to cure breast cancer, rather than preventing it. 

She said that there were some interesting hormones that could be studied, such as prolactin, which is produced in late pregnancy to prepare the breast for lactation. 

Studies have shown hormonal changes during pregnancy and breast-feeding can give life-long protection against breast cancer, she said. Therefore, the right hormones could potentially have a similar effect. 

'We should be looking at hormone production during late pregnancy and lactation,' she added. But she said that only 'around a dozen' people are looking at prevention. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

