TITLE	Red wine could lower men's lung cancer risk

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 9:39 AM on 7th October 2008 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

Men who drink a couple of glasses or red wine per day have a lower risk of lung cancer, according to a new study.

Measuring the effect of beer, red wine, white wine and liquor consumption on the risk of lung cancer, there was on average a two per cent lower lung cancer risk associated with each glass of red wine consumed per month.

Researchers looked at data from more than 84,000 men aged 45 to 69 that was collected through the California Men's Health Study between 2000 and 2003.

They found 210 cases of lung cancer for the report in Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers  and  Prevention, a journal of the American Association for Cancer Research. 

'An antioxidant component in red wine may be protective of lung cancer, particularly among smokers,' said Dr Chun Chao, from Kaiser Permanente Department of Research and Evaluation in Pasadena, California.

The most substantial risk reduction was among smokers who drank one to two glasses of red wine per day with a 60 per cent reduced lung cancer risk.

 Researchers however warned men to stop smoking as the best way to reduce lung cancer risk, noting that even men who drank one to two glasses of red wine per day still face higher lung cancer risk than non-smokers.

No clear associations with lung cancer were noted for consumption of white wine, beer, or liquor.

 'Red wine is known to contain high levels of antioxidants. There is a compound called resveratrol that is very rich in red wine because it is derived from the grape skin. This compound has shown significant health benefits in pre-clinical studies,' Chao said. 

Chao said their findings should not be construed to recommend heavy alcohol consumption. 

Lung cancer is the second most common cancer diagnosed in  men after prostate cancer, with more than 22,000 new cases diagnosed each year.

Incidence rates in men peaked in the late 1970s and since then have decreased by more than 40 per cent, reflecting the decline in male smoking rates after World War II. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

