TITLE	Why a daily dose of aspirin may lower risk of breast cancer

 By David Derbyshire Last updated at 8:48 AM on 8th October 2008

An Aspirin a day may protect women against breast cancer, a landmark study suggests. 

The biggest medical review of its kind linked the painkiller to a 13 per cent fall in rates of the disease. 

The same report found that ibuprofen  -  one of the most common over-the-counter painkillers  -  is associated with a 21 per cent fall in the risk of breast cancer.

The findings add to the growing evidence that aspirin and other anti-inflammatories protect against a host of diseases  -  and don't only ease aches and pains. 

The report, published in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, pooled results from 38 studies involving 2.7million women. 

It found that those taking nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID) painkillers had a 12 per cent lower risk of breast cancer during their lifetime than the general population. 

A separate analysis for aspirin found a 13 per cent fall in risk, while ibuprofen was linked to a 21 per cent decline. 

This research was carried out by the University of British Columbia, the Vancouver Coastal Health Research Institute and the University of Santiago de Compostela. 

 

In Britain, around 12 per cent of women can expect to have breast cancer should they reach 90. 

The reduction in risk uncovered by the study would see that figure fall to 10.6 per cent of women.

 

Although the report will raise hope for millions of women, it does not establish whether painkillers prevent breast cancer  -  or whether women taking them were less likely to suffer cancer for other reasons. 

Many of the women in the studies could have been suffering from other diseases and have been taking other drugs. Their lifestyle and diet could be very different from the rest of the population. 

Dr Mahyar Etminan, of the University of British Columbia, said: 'The results are encouraging and may help us better understand the importance of inflammation in the pathology of the disease. 

'However, we don't recommend the routine use of NSAIDs for breast cancer prevention until large randomised trials confirm these findings.' 

Some researchers believe aspirins and other anti-inflammatories block enzymes involved in inflammation and cancers. 

Past studies have shown that aspirin can help fight heart disease, blood pressure, arthritis and Alzheimer's disease. It has also been linked to lower rates of bowel, mouth and throat cancers. 

However, the drug can also increase the risk of stomach bleeding, ulcers and kidney problems. 

While some studies have suggested painkillers can protect against cancer, others have shown they make no difference  -  or can even increase the risks. 

Dr Jodie Moffat, of Cancer Research UK, said: 'There is evidence that aspirin and other NSAIDs can help to prevent certain types of cancer from developing but more research is needed before NSAIDs can be widely recommended. 

'It's important to remember that taking drugs such as aspirin over long periods of time can cause significant side effects.' 

 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

