TITLE	Myths and facts about eggs: Part Three

by ROSALIND RYAN, femail.co.uk

Can eggs help fight cancer? Should pregnant women eat eggs?

Find out with the last part of our guide to egg myths and facts.

Pregnant women and children should avoid eating runny eggs? UNRESOLVED: Experts are currently divided over this issue.

The Food Standards Agency - the govenment watchdog responsible for food safety - says vulnerable groups, including expectant mums, infants and the elderly, should avoid eating eggs that have not been hard boiled.

In contrast, the British Egg Information Service says these groups can eat eggs with runny yolks.

Traditionally eggs with runny yolks have been seen as a greater risk of carrying salmonella. But this has changed since the introduction of the Lion Quality scheme.

More than 150,000 Lion Quality eggs have been tested over the past two years and all were found to be free from salmonella. The government's own Advisory Committee on the Microbiological Safety of Food has found that human cases of salmonella have more than halved since the introduction of the scheme.

As a result, the BEIS is campaigning to bring in new guidelines for at-risk groups. 'We are now lobbying quite heavily to get the government advice changed,' says nutritionist Cath Macdonald.

If they are successful, the guidelines may change and those in 'at-risk' groups may be able to eat runny eggs. But until then, government advice for pregnant women, infants and the elderly is to avoid eating raw eggs or food with raw and partially cooked eggs like mousses.

Organic eggs are more likely to contain salmonella? MYTH:Some shoppers may be wary about buying organic eggs as the hens producing them

will not have been given antibiotics to stop the spread of diseases.

They may worry that because the hens have not been vaccinated against certain diseases or given antibiotics to fight infections, the eggs they produce may contain viruses or be contaminated in some way.

But if the organic farmer subscribes to the Lion Quality scheme, the eggs will more than likely be free from infection. 'Even organic hens will have been vaccinated against salmonella,' says Cath Macdonald.

The Lion Quality vaccination scheme is used across all methods of egg production, from intensive farming where hens are kept in cages, to free range farms where the hens can roam where they like.

Eating organic eggs means you will also be eating eggs free from drugs and other chemicals. A report by the Soil Association in August last year found that 20 per cent of chicken meat and 10 per cent of eggs contained drugs 'that are not fit for human consumption'. One of the drugs, nicarbazin, has never been tested for human safety but causes birth defects and hormonal problems in animals.

Eggs can help fight against cancer? FACT: One of the powerful antioxidants found in eggs is selenium. Antioxidants track down and fight free-radicals in the body. Free-radicals are particles that you can pick up from cigarettes or the atmosphere that can speed up the ageing process or even trigger a serious medical condition like heart disease or cancer.

Selenium works as an antioxidant but can also help regulate your metabolism. This means your body processes food properly so the right amount of nutrients can find their way to your skin, hair and organs. Selenium has also been found to protect against prostate cancer in men.

A deficiency in selenium can lead to a form of heart disease called Keshan disease. It is most common in parts of China where levels of selenium in the soil are very low.

For more information about the health benefits of eating eggs - and delicious recipes - visit www.britegg.co.uk

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

