TITLE	Red wine 'reduces lung cancer risk in smokers', study finds

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 1:37 AM on 11th October 2008 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

Drinking red wine could reduce the risk of lung cancer among smokers and ex-smokers, research suggested yesterday. 

Smokers who drank at least a glass of red wine daily were 60 per cent less likely to develop lung cancer than non-drinkers, a study found. 

However, white wine did not reduce the risk in the same way. 

Studies examining the relationship between lung cancer and alcohol consumption have had mixed results, Dr Chun Chao of Kaiser Permanente Southern California in Pasadena and her colleagues told the journal Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and Prevention.

Much of this research has failed to adjust for factors like social status that can influence alcohol use and lung cancer risk.

In the current study, Chao and her colleagues looked at 84,170 men aged 45-69 years old. Between 2000 and 2006, 210 of them developed lung cancer.

After accounting for age, education, income, exposure to second-hand smoke, body weight, and other factors, the researchers found that their lung cancer risk steadily decreased with red wine drinking, with a two per cent drop seen with each additional glass of red wine a man drank per month.

No other type of alcoholic beverage, including white wine, was associated with lung cancer risk.

For men who were heavy smokers, the reduction in risk was greater, with a 4 per cent lower likelihood of developing lung cancer seen for each glass of red wine consumed per month.

Research has shown that wine drinkers may have healthier lifestyles and tend to have more education and higher income than non-wine drinkers, the researchers said.

But the fact that reduced lung cancer risk was seen only with red wine, not white, 'lends support to a causal association for red wine and suggests that compounds that are present at high concentrations in red wine but not in white wine, beer or liquors may be protective against lung carcinogenesis,' Chao and her team say.

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

