TITLE	Child brain cancer linked to infections

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Some types of childhood brain cancer may be triggered by infections, according to a study.

The research found that cases of the disease tended to appear in clusters for short periods of time, in a pattern which scientists believe suggests a link to bacteria or a virus.

Brain cancer affects around 290 children in the UK each year, resulting in about 100 deaths. Rates of the disease have been increasing gradually since the 1950s.

Scientists from Cancer Research UK's Paediatric and Familial Cancer Group at the University of Manchester analysed 1,045 cases of the disease, all from the North-West of England, dating from 1954 to 1998.

They found that in some years more children were diagnosed with cancer who lived close together than would be expected by chance.

These mini-epidemics are typical of diseases caused by infections, says a report today in the British Journal of Cancer.

Professor Jillian Birch, who led the research, said clustering was especially clear for two types of brain tumour called astrocytoma and ependymoma.

'Children's risk of these cancers also varied depending on the time of year they were born, with those born in late autumn or winter at the highest risk,' she said.

'This may be because children are more prone to infection during the cold winter months.

'The fact that the clusters and seasonal pattern in births are restricted to particular types of childhood brain tumours adds weight to our findings and will allow us to focus our future research on these cases.'

Professor Gordon McVie, Joint Director General of Cancer Research UK, said: 'It's vital that we learn more about the causes of childhood cancers and this is an important step in the right direction.

'We'd thought infection might play a role in the development of children's brain cancer, but up until now we had no evidence to support the theory.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

