TITLE	Just one of glass of wine a day increases risk of breast cancer

 By Jenny Hope Last updated at 12:35 AM on 19th October 2008

Drinking just one large glass of wine a day increases the chances of developing breast cancer by a fifth, say experts.

The amount of alcohol in measures regularly served in wine bars and pubs pushes up the risk of cancer by far more than most women realise, it is claimed.

A large glass of wine is the equivalent of three units of alcohol at 12 per cent strength. 

Drinking two glasses raises the risk by more than a third and it doubles for women who consume nine units or three glasses a day compared with those who do not drink. 

However, Government research reveals that four out of five women are ignorant of the breast cancer risk. 

The findings from the Know Your Limits campaign represent a total of more than four million women who are regularly putting their health in danger. 

Doctors believe rising rates of breast cancer are being fuelled by soaring levels of drinking among women, as there has been a steady increase in breast cancer cases in the last ten years when rates should have been falling, or at least reached a plateau, because of mass screening. 

Only obesity levels  -  which are also linked to breast cancer  -  have shown the same kind of upward trend over the last decade. 

Around 44,000 British women are diagnosed with breast cancer each year, and it claims 13,000 lives. 

Previous research suggests that binge drinking  -  five or more drinks on one occasion  -  can double the risk of breast cancer. 

It is unclear how drinking alcohol promotes breast cancer but it may work by raising levels of the sex hormone oestrogen in the body. 

Drinking alcohol is one of the few identified risk factors for developing breast cancer, although the biggest risk factor is increasing age. Four out of five breast cancers diagnosed in the UK occur in women over 50. 

Dr Sarah Cant, Policy Manager at Breakthrough Breast Cancer, said: 'Drinking moderate or high levels of any type of alcoholic drink has many health consequences, including an increased chance of breast cancer. 

'Although many factors might affect our risk of getting breast cancer, limiting how much we drink is one thing we can do to try to reduce that risk.' 

Public Health Minister-Dawn Primarolo said: 'It's shocking, even for me, to see the potential risks of drinking over recommended guidelines in black and white. 

'One large glass of 12 per cent wine takes a woman to her recommended daily limit in just one drink. 

'Knowing the potential health consequences enables women to make choices that can reduce their risk of developing breast cancer.' 

A separate survey published by Breakthrough Breast Cancer also shows women wrongly blame their genes for getting cancer. 

A strong genetic history of breast cancer is to blame in only 5 per cent of all breast cancer cases, but nearly two-thirds of women over the age of 50 believe the disease 'runs in the family'. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

