TITLE	Shark blood, pumping iron and soy beans: A round-up of the latest health benefits

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 10:52 PM on 27th October 2008

Shark blood could hold the secret to tackling cancer. Tests found their blood contains antibodies that appear to attach themselves to cancer cells and slow down or even stop their growth. 

These antibodies, produced by the immune system, are also likely to be able to survive the harsh conditions of the human gut because they can withstand very acidic environments. Thus, they could be developed into drugs that could produce high levels of cancer-busting medicine.

 

A team of experts at La Trobe University in Melbourne have been testing a modified form of the shark antibodies against different diseases. 

Although sharks have similar immune systems to humans, the antibodies they produce to fight disease are exceptionally resilient. 

Cancer affects one in three people in the UK at some point in their lives.

Could a workout help save bones? 

Pumping iron can help treat patients with osteoarthritis, according to new research. It shows that lifting weights can reduce pain, boost walking speed and improve balance in people with osteoarthritis of the knee. 

Researchers said working out in the gym boosts the strength of muscles in the leg, which partly compensates for the destruction that is going on inside the knee joint. 

An estimated eight million people in Britain have some degree of osteoarthritis. It is caused by a breakdown of protective cartilage tissue within the joints. As this degrades, unprotected bones begin to rub together, triggering pain and inflammation. 

Many patients rely on painkillers, but these can damage the stomach if used for long periods of time. 

Researchers at the University of Sydney, Australia, analysed the effects of weight-training on patients with osteoarthritis of the knee, and the results showed a significant effect on well-being.

Soy beans reduce the risk of asthma 

Daily soy supplements are thought to alleviate the symptoms of asthma. Compounds found in soy beans reduce inflammation of the airways, leading to less coughing and improved breathing. 

Researchers believe one of these compounds, known as genistein, helps block compounds which cause the inflammation in the first place. 

It has also been shown that the more genistein people with asthma have in their diets, the less severe the symptoms. Genistein is an isoflavone - one of a group of powerful antioxidants linked to a number of other health benefits, including a lower risk of prostate cancer.

 In a new clinical trial, at Northwestern University in America, patients will get two 50mg soy isoflavone supplements a day for two weeks. It follows a number of studies which suggest an association between reduced lung function and reduced consumption of antioxidants in a variety of respiratory conditions. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

