TITLE	Migraine sufferers 'less likely to fall prey to breast cancer'

 By John Garth 

Last updated at 10:03 PM on 6th November 2008

 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

Women who suffer from migraines are 30 per cent less likely to develop breast cancer, researchers said yesterday.

 They say the findings may point to new ways of reducing a woman's breast cancer risk. 

Doctors believe the headaches are triggered by lower levels of oestrogen and progesterone, hormones thought to drive tumour growth in the most common breast cancers. 

The study, reported in the journal Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and Prevention, looked at data from 3,412 post-menopausal women, 1,938 of whom had been diagnosed with breast cancer. 

All the participants gave details of their migraine history. 

Dr Christopher Li, who led the team from the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, said the results 'point to a possible new factor that may be related to breast-cancer risk'.

 

 

Migraines, which can be accompanied by nausea, vomiting and extreme sensitivity to light and noise, often strike when oestrogen levels fall due to the time of the month.

But during late pregnancy, when oestrogen levels are high, four out of five women who normally suffer the intense headaches find that they clear up.

The U.S. research team looked at the histories of more than 3,000 women, nearly 2,000 of them with a history of breast cancer.

Dr Christopher Li, who led the study, said that women who get migraines 'may have a chronically lower baseline estrogen', adding: 'That difference could be what is protective against breast cancer.'

'This gives us a new avenue to explore the biology behind risk reduction. Hopefully this could help stimulate other ideas and extend what we know about the biology of the disease.'

The study, conducted by the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Centre in Seattle, is published in the specialist journal Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and Prevention.

The study comes after research published earlier this year showed migraines may increase the risk of heart attacks and strokes in women.

Separate research has also suggested migraine sufferers could be more likely to be struck by blood clots in their veins.

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

