TITLE	How my purple tomato could save your life

 By Cathie Martin Last updated at 10:04 PM on 8th November 2008

 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

Nearly ten years ago, a friend introduced me to Dr Maria Benedetta Donati, an Italian scientist who is fascinated by the link between diet and health. She explained to me the so-called French paradox. Despite eating four times more butter as well as significantly more of the other dairy fats, and having higher average blood pressure and cholesterol, French people are far less likely to suffer heart attacks than North Americans. What gave the French greater protection was their moderate consumption of red wine, which has a high content of polyphenol, a chemical found in plants.

Recommending that Britons drink red wine was always going to encounter opposition, so I began thinking about significantly increasing the levels of specific polyphenols in a food that people consume in substantial amounts. 

Fewer than a quarter of Britons eat the suggested level of five portions of fruit or vegetables a day, but what if we concentrated our efforts on a product they were likely to eat?

The obvious choice was the tomato - it's eaten in sandwiches, in pizzas, with burgers and as ketchup. 

 

In 2002, I joined a group of European researchers working on different ways to engineer the antioxidant levels in tomatoes so that they would have an impact on consumers. 

To do this we needed to 'turn on' all the biochemical steps needed to make polyphenol antioxidants. 

We had shown that this was technically possible using certain genes from the snapdragon plant responsible for the production of the rich purple colour in its flowers. 

The colouring is due to an antioxidant called anthocyanin, which is also found in cranberries, blackberries and blueberries.

   More... Purple 'super tomato' that can fight against cancer 

Working with PhD graduate Eugenio Butelli, we took genes from the DNA of the garden snapdragon and inserted them into tomato plants. 

We obtained some shoots and later a few of these plants produced roots. We put the plants in soil in the greenhouse and waited anxiously for the appearance of fruit. 

It was just before last Christmas and everything grew very slowly in the low temperatures. 

Just before Eugenio went home to Italy, I thought that some of the green fruit had a purple tinge. Eugenio was unconvinced, but by the time we returned to work after the holidays, it was clear that we had created the most beautiful purple fruit. 

There were already numerous scientific reports of the health-promoting properties of anthocyanins, which show how diets rich in berries are beneficial. I thought - naively - that our report of the very high levels we had engineered in tomatoes would be published too. 

But our work, although startling, was deemed to be not novel enough. It became clear that we needed to see if the tomatoes could, in fact, promote health before our work became worthy of publication. Again the Italians came to the rescue. 

Friends at the University of Milan, and colleagues at the European Institute of Oncology agreed that they would run trials involving mice bred to have a very high likelihood of developing particular diseases. The Italians decided to first run tests on cancer-prone mice. 

Mice fed on a standard diet and those on the same diet supplemented with regular red tomatoes started to die, but surprisingly the ones whose diet was supplemented with the purple tomatoes lived significantly longer. 

The important point was that this was achieved by a relatively small change to their diet, not by giving pharmaceutical levels of drugs. The results surprised the Milan team, who decided to run three more trials before they showed me any data. 

When I finally saw the results I was astounded. They showed that we could indeed achieve an impact on health through diet, albeit only in mice. They had shown that anthocyanins, consumed in a dietary context, could offer some protection against cancer. 

Of course, this is only the start. I want to find out whether we can see the same effects in humans at risk of cancer. For this we need to run clinical trials to see if volunteers fed purple tomatoes show reduced symptoms of disease. 

However, improving health through diet is no quick-fix, and we need to ensure that our children have healthy, well-balanced diets and form habits that will protect them until old age. 

I also want to test whether the purple tomatoes can protect against other chronic diseases. Heart disease runs in my family and I am getting to the age where I want to reduce my own risk factors as much as possible. 

And there is another, more basic, reason to welcome purple tomatoes - they look fantastic on pizzas.

&#8226; Cathie Martin is Professor of Plant Biology at the John Innes Centre, Norwich. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

