TITLE	Tomato sauce 'can cut risk of prostate cancer by a third'

Eating tomato sauce twice a week could reduce the risk of men developing prostate cancer by up to a third, according to new research.

American experts, who carried out one of the biggest studies into the benefits of a tomato-rich diet involving almost 50,000 men, are urging males to eat more tomatobased products.

Although previous studies have found that tomato sauce has health benefits, this is the first to suggest that even small, regular doses can protect against the cancer that affects one in 12 men.

The secret lies in lycopene - an antioxidant in the skin of tomatoes - which makes them red.

Scientists already suspect that lycopene is packed with diseasefighting properties and that it is easier for the body to absorb it in the form of ketchup rather than raw tomatoes.

Dr Edward Giovannucci, a nutrition expert at Harvard Medical School who led the 12-year study, said ketchup is an ideal source of lycopene because it carries high concentrations of the compound due to the thermal processing used in its manufacture.

'Tomato sauce captures most of the lycopene,' said Dr Giovannucci. 'We suggest that increased consumption of tomatoes and tomato-based products may be prudent.'

Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer in men in the UK, with more than 21,700 new cases annually. Because it is slow-growing, many men are unaware they have it until they develop symptoms such as difficulty urinating or pain in the back, hips or pelvis.

In recent years, scientists have investigated whether changes in diet can help to prevent the disease. Most research focused on foods containing lycopene because, as an antioxidant, it fights off toxins - called free radicals. These can cause cell damage, which may lead to cancer.

Although lycopene is found in foods such as shellfish, watermelon and pink grapefruit, tomatoes are the richest source.

The study tracked the health of more than 47,000 men between 1986 and 1998. It found that during that time, nearly 2,500 had developed prostate cancer.

The results, published in the latest Journal of the National Cancer Institute, showed that those who ate at least two servings of ketchup a week were up to 36 per cent less likely to get the disease than those who had one serving or less a month.

There were 437 cases of cancer in those who rarely ate ketchup compared with only 295 in those who had at least a couple of servings a week.

Dr Tim Key, of Cancer Research UK, said the study gave weight to the possibility that lycopene may be important in the cancer battle.

But he added: 'We need a lot more data on lycopene from human studies and these will be emerging over the next two to four years.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

