TITLE	Health news: Bad side effects that are a blessing, a bacteria to help the elderly and how to avoid gagging at the dentist

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 9:12 PM on 17th November 2008

Health stories from around the world this week include how breast cancer patients who suffer bad side effects from drug treatment are less at risk of the disease recurring. Also a friendly bacteria that helps elderly immune systems and how you can stop 'gagging' during dental treatment. 

Breast cancer patients who suffer bad side effects from drug treatment are less at risk of the disease coming back. 

Hot flushes, night sweats and painful joints can all be a blessing in disguise, according to a report published in Lancet Oncology. 

Post-menopausal women whose cancer is stimulated by the female hormone oestrogen usually take tamoxifen, or drugs known as aromatase inhibitors (AI), for up to five years after surgery because it improves their chances of beating the disease.

Now Cancer Research UK scientists have found that women who take tamoxifen or the AI drug anastrozole and suffer side effects within three months are 10 per cent less likely to have a recurrence of breast cancer than women who do not develop these symptoms. 

A supplement similar to the prebiotic found in breast milk can boost the health of pensioners. 

This 'friendly bacteria' helps halt the decline in their immune systems. Research published in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition found that taking the supplement Bimuno every day for 10 weeks significantly increased good bacteria in the gut of over-65s and increased their immune response. 

As people get older, good bacteria decrease, which can leave people more susceptible to colds and flu. 

Prebiotics  -  a form of non-digestible carbohydrates  -  work by feeding good bacteria in the colon, while reducing harmful bacteria. 

Dr Jelena Vulevic, who carried out the research at Reading University, said: 'Bimuno enhances immune function in elderly people.' 

The unpleasant experience of 'gagging' during dental treatment could be avoided by simply applying pressure to your hands. 

Research at the University of Miami shows that when 2lb of pressure was applied to the palm of the hands of patients in the dental chair, they gagged less easily. 

In particular, the gag reflex was less likely to occur when areas toward the front of the mouth were touched. 

It's thought that the pressure  -  which can be mimicked by holding an item of the desired weight  -  may have some effect on the reflex of the nerves involved, although it is not known how. 

The gag reflex  -  when the back of the throat contracts  -  is a normal body reaction. It occurs when certain areas of the mouth are touched, including the back of the tongue, and back of the throat. This helps prevent choking. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

