TITLE	Exercise cuts the risk of cancer - but only if you get at least seven hours sleep, study finds

 By Fiona Macrae Last updated at 2:14 AM on 18th November 2008

 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

Exercise can cut the risk of cancer - but only if followed by a good night's sleep.

A 10-year-study of thousands of women found significantly fewer cases of cancer, including breast cancer, among those who were the most physically active.

But sleeping less than seven hours a night wiped out the benefits of exercise and increased the risk of cancer.

The researchers, from the U.S. government-funded National Cancer Institute, asked almost 6,000 women about their exercise and sleep routines before tracking their health for ten years.

During this time, 604 cases of cancer, including 186 cases of breast cancer, were diagnosed.

Analysis showed the women who exercised the most were up to 25 per cent less likely to have developed cancer.

But limiting the analysis to the under-65s, showed the benefits of exercise were cancelled out by sleeping for less than seven hours a night.

The researchers told the American Association for Cancer Research international conference in Washington DC that the next step would be to investigate the potential mechanisms underlying the anti-cancer interaction between sleep and exercise.

It is not clear how exercise reduces cancer risk but hormone levels, the immune system and body weight may all be involved.

Lack of sleep is linked to obesity, which is known to raise the risk of half a dozen cancers.

Loss of sleep may also alter levels of hormones key in the development of cancer and stressed-out sorts may more likely to seek solace in junk food, cigarettes and alcohol, all of which can raise the odds of the disease.

   More... Counselling cuts stress levels to double chances of surviving breast cancer, say researchers 

 Many previous studies have shown that exercise cuts the risk of cancer but they have failed to agree how much is needed.

Research published last month concluded that regularly carrying out strenuous exercise in later life reduces the odds of breast cancer by almost a third.

Examples of vigorous activity include fast dancing or getting stuck into heavy housework such as scrubbing the floors or digging the garden.

However, other studies have found more gentle activity to be of benefit.

A six-year study of more than 20,000 European women concluded that hoovering, dusting and other light domestic chores cut the risk of the disease by almost 30 per cent.

Others maintain that nothing beats breaking out in a sweat.

Last year, Exeter University exercise physiologist Gary O'Donovan claimed government advice that brisk walking, gardening or mowing the lawn is enough to keep you fit is misleading.

Although these activities will help health, exercise physiologist Gary O'Donovan insisted that far greater benefit can be derived from more strenuous exercise, such as jogging or playing tennis.

Dr O'Donovan, a fellow of the Royal Society for the Promotion of Health, said: 'Time and again, the largest and most robust studies have shown that vigorously-active individuals live longer and enjoy a better quality of life than moderately-active individuals and couch potatoes.'

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

