TITLE	Wartime diet of regular fasting slashes prostate cancer risk

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 1:54 PM on 4th December 2008

Rationing food intake every few weeks could slash men's risk of prostate cancer, scientists believe.

Men who halve the amount they normally eat for a week or two once a month could markedly lower their chances of a tumour at a young age.

Animal studies carried out at the University of Minnesota showed wartime eating habits significantly delayed the onset of cancer.

In human terms, researchers said, it was the equivalent of men getting cancer in their seventies or eighties rather than their fifties.

But the study showed going on a permanent low-calorie diet did not have the same powerful effect.

Scientists think occasional rationing may ward off cancer by constantly adjusting the balance of certain fat hormones.

High levels of leptin, a hormone released by fat cells, have been found to stimulate cancer cell growth, while high levels of another hormone, called adinopectin, appear to have a protective effect.

The latest findings, published in the journal Prostate, suggest frequent rationing cuts leptin levels and boosts those of adinopectin.

Several other studies have suggested limiting calories could be crucial to good health and a longer life.

In 2004, experts at Harvard Medical School in Boston, found women who regularly rationed their food were half as likely to get breast cancer as those who always ate until they were full.

 

More recently, researchers studying daughters of women caught in the Dutch famine of 1944-45 found they were more fertile and had a higher number of pregnancies than those born to mothers with better food supplies.

In Australia, meanwhile, scientists have recently embarked on a clinical trial to see if depriving cancer patients of food for a couple of days before chemotherapy treatment can protect the body against its toxic effects.

The health of Britain's population actually improved after rationing was introduced during World War Two in 1940, finally ending in 1954.

Most people ate less meat, fat, eggs and sugar as they were all in short supply.

Instead, consumption of home-grown vegetables rose dramatically. Infant mortality rates declined and the average age at which people died from natural causes increased.

Researcher Professor Margot Cleary, from The Hormel Institute at the University of Minnesota, said humans may have evolved to respond to cycles of feast and famine.

'My theory is this is how all humans ate until fairly recently.

'We would have periods of restriction and then, when there was a holiday or it was harvest time, there would be periods of plenty.

'Nowadays, it's a permanent feast, especially in developed countries.' 

Professor Cleary and her team studied three groups of male mice. One was put on a normal diet, one restricted to 75 per cent of what they usually ate and the last fed normal amounts for two weeks, followed by half-rations for the next two.

Just six per cent of the fasting mice had a tumour at 18 weeks - roughly the equivalent of middle-age for a man - compared with 30 per cent in those fed normal amounts.

Professor Cleary said research is now needed to find out how early into adulthood humans should begin fasting to protect against cancer.

But she warned children should never ration their food unless under doctor's orders.

Nearly 32,000 cases of prostate cancer are diagnosed every year in the UK and 10,000 men die from it - the equivalent of more than one an hour.

The risks increase with age, with men over 50 more likely to develop a tumour, and there is a strong genetic element. 

Men with a brother, father or uncle who had the disease are themselves more at risk.

But eating too many meat and dairy products can also increase the odds. 

Oxford University scientists recently found these foods raise levels of a hormone called Insulin-like Growth Factor-1 (IGF-1), which promotes cell growth.

The Prostate Cancer Charity said the results of the rationing study were 'interesting' but offered no proof that men who starved themselves were less likely to get cancer.

Chief executive John Neate said: 'We know there are many supporters of fasting as a means of reducing the impact of cancer. But there is no hard evidence as yet that this works in prostate cancer. 

'We also do not know whether fasting might have negative side effects.' 

However, the charity does recommend men eat more fruit and vegetables, less animal fat and watch their weight, all of which may 'possibly reduce the risk of prostate cancer'.

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

