TITLE	Walking for an hour a day can 'halve risk of getting breast cancer'

 By Daniel Martin Last updated at 12:18 AM on 11th December 2008

Walking for just an hour a day can more than halve a woman's risk of developing breast cancer, a study shows. 

Women who walk regularly and take further gentle exercise for at least an hour a week are 55 per cent less likely to get a tumour than those who never work out. 

The finding backs earlier studies, which suggest even gentle exercise is crucial in helping to prevent the disease. 

 Around 40,000 British women each year are diagnosed with breast cancer, which kills around 12,000. It affects one in nine women at some point in their lives. 

Risk factors range from being overweight and having a family history of the disease, to smoking and going through the menopause. 

The study, by Nagoya City University in Japan, tracked 30,000 women over 12 years to monitor their lifestyle habits and risk of cancer. 

Each was asked whether their daily walking totalled less than 30 minutes, 30 to 59 minutes, or an hour or more. 

   More... Confusion as watchdog U-turns and says you CAN eat nuts during pregnancy Is an implant really the best choice after losing a breast? See our expert guide to the OTHER options 

The results, published in the journal Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers  and  Prevention, found that those who walked at least an hour a day, and then went jogging, swimming or to the gym for another hour once a week, were substantially less likely to have cancer. 

The researchers said: 'We recommend walking for one hour a day, along with additional weekly exercise, to protect against breast cancer, regardless of menopausal status or body mass index.' 

Higher-risk women, such as those who are overweight or postmenopausal, benefited just as much from daily strolls as those at lowerrisk, they added. 

A spokesman for Cancer Research UK said that maintaining a healthy body weight is one of the best ways to reduce the risks of breast cancer. 

This is because fat tissue in those who are overweight produces more hormones and growth factors than in slimmer people. High levels of some of these hormones, including oestrogen and insulin, can increase the risk of certain cancers. 

Last month, a study found that exercise can cut the risk of cancer overall - but only if it followed by a good night's sleep. 

A U.S. study of thousands of women found significantly fewer cases of cancer, including breast cancer, among the most physically active. 

But sleeping less than seven hours a night wiped out the benefits - and actually increased the risk of cancer. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

