TITLE	Breast cancer risk warning reignites fears over HRT

 By Daniel Martin 

Last updated at 10:07 AM on 16th December 2008

Hormone replacement therapy could double your risk of breast cancer, scientists say &#8211; just months after researchers gave the drugs the all-clear.

The new warning follows a study in 2002 that led to a million women coming off HRT when it reported that those taking a particular type had a higher risk of breast cancer, heart disease and stroke.

Then last year, re-analysis of the data found the risks only applied to those in their sixties and seventies, older than most Britons taking the therapy. 

And this year, experts said HRT was safe for women in their fifties too. But the latest study, by U.S. scientists, shows the breast cancer threat may be higher than previously thought. 

Women who took HRT for as little as two years were at an increased danger, they found.

When the patients stopped the therapy, however, their odds quickly improved, returning to a normal risk level two years later.

For their research, the team looked again at the 2002 findings of the Women's Health Initiative study and followed women who took part, to find out what happened after they stopped taking 'combined' HRT pills, which contain oestrogen and progestogen. The original study had looked at the risk of breast cancer over five years.

But the most recent research calculated the risk at points before, during and for three years after, the women were taking HRT pills. It rose with the start of use, and peaked when the women had been on HRT for five years.

At that stage, the risk for women who had been on HRT for five years, was twice that of those not on the pills. The risk fell again after most stopped taking it.

Does breast cancer fear put you off HRT?

Researchers said the results were 'worrisome', but Dr Claudine Isaacs, of Georgetown University, in Washington DC, who led the study, said some of the findings were positive.

'You can still diminish the risk by quitting, even if you've been on hormones for a long time. It's not like smoking where you have to wait ten or 15 years for the risk to come down.'

However, the average age of the women in the study was 63, much older than the majority taking HRT. So the findings may only apply to older women.

Drug company Wyeth, which manufactures the combined drug, said: 'Hormone therapy remains a good healthcare choice to relieve moderate to severe menopausal symptoms.' British women reach the menopause at 52 on average. HRT is normally prescribed to combat symptoms such as hot flushes and mood changes.

A treatment for women with breast cancer can reduce the chance of the disease spreading to other parts of the body by a fifth, scientists said last night.

Women given the hormone exemestane after surgery were 19 per cent less likely to see their cancer spread than those receiving standard chemotherapy with the drug tamoxifen, the San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium, in Texas, found. It is not licensed for use on breast cancer in the UK. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

