TITLE	Drug that can prevent breast cancer could offer hope to 300,000 women at high risk

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 12:51 PM on 13th December 2008

Hormone drug Tamoxifen could prove a lifeline to the 300,000 British women currently at risk of developing breast cancer after researchers found that the it could cut chances of women developing breast cancer by up to two thirds.

Tamoxifen is already used to treat the disease, but the recent research could result in thousands of potential sufferers, often with a family history of breast cancer, taking the drug as a preventative measure.

The research team are now looking to find a way to predict which patients will respond to the drug. 

The findings, which were announced today at a research conference in Texas, were based on a theory established in earlier studies, which found thatwomen with dense breasts - a term meaning they have more non-fatty tissue - are known to have a higher risk of breast cancer. 

The latest study, which was led by Cancer Research UK, suggested that breast density can be lowered using tamoxifen, as can the chance of a tumor coming back. 

   More... New breast cancer drug cuts risk of death by a fifth compared to NHS treatment, research shows New test 'could spare breast cancer patients from harsh chemotherapy side effects' 

'Women with dense breasts are typically at four to five times the risk of developing breast cancer than women without dense breasts,' said Jack Cuzick, who led the study for Cancer Research UK.

'Women who lost 10 per cent or more in breast density - 40 percent of the women getting tamoxifen - had a 63 percent, almost a two-thirds, reduction in all breast cancer.'

He said about 10 percent of women have dense breasts. Such breasts are harder to read on mammograms but there is evidence the tissue in their breasts may be more cancer-prone.

Cuzick's team had conducted one of many studies that showed high-risk women who took Tamoxifen were at least 40 percent less likely to either develop breast cancer, or to have it come back. 

They went back and looked at all the mammograms of the more than 1,000 women who took part in the study. 

If a woman's breast density did not change during the treatment, she was much more likely to develop cancer despite taking Tamoxifen. 

Cuzick stressed that the ongoing study only looked at Tamoxifen and not at other treatments, such as the newer drugs known as aromatase inhibitors. But he said it validated the idea of using breast density as a way of telling whether a treatment is working, whether Tamoxifen or something else.

'It is important to find a way to predict who will respond to tamoxifen, and changes in breast density may constitute an early indicator of benefit,' said Jack Cuzick of the Wolfson Institute of Preventive Medicine in London.

'If a woman doesn't show breast density dropping within a year or so, you might want to consider other therapy,' Cuzick said.

Tamoxifen is already well-established as a life-saving drug in the treatment of breast cancer, having been widely used for over 20 years. Relatively cheap, the drug has few, and rare side-effects.

Each year 45,000 women are diagnised with breast cancer, a third of which die from the disease. 

In another report, a team at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota said they found some clues as to why dense breast tissue is more likely to develop tumors. 

Dense breast tissue contains more cells believed to give rise to breast cancer, Dr. Karthik Ghosh told the meeting.

Dr. Celine Vachon and colleagues found that dense breast tissue has more aromatase enzyme than non-dense tissue. This is significant because aromatase helps convert hormones into estrogen, which can fuel breast cancer development.

'If aromatase is differentially expressed in dense and non-dense breast tissue, this could provide one mechanism by which density may increase breast cancer risk,' Vachon said in a statement.

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

