TITLE	Double whammy treatment could halve the fatality rate of prostate cancer deaths

 By Jenny Hope Last updated at 5:34 PM on 16th December 2008

 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

Death rates among some prostate cancer patients could be halved by a new method of treating the disease, scientists say. 

The researchers, who used a combination of hormone treatment and radiotherapy, believe the practice could become standard for many who have the disease.

Each year, 31,000 are diagnosed with prostate cancer in the UK. For 10,000 of these, the disease has spread outside the prostate - but has not reached distant sites in the body.

These are the men who would benefit from their findings, the Swedish researchers say.

UK oncologists increasingly prescribe drugs for two or three years, or for life, to reduce levels of the male hormone testosterone and stop the cancer growing.

And although radiotherapy may be used to kill cancer cells, it is not universal practice.

The latest study combined the treatments. Researchers gave half the volunteers hormone-blocking drugs. The remainder were treated with radiotherapy followed by drugs. 

 

After seven years, 79 men taking hormone drugs had died of their cancer compared with 37 given drugs and radiotherapy. 

Those only taking the drugs were almost twice as likely to have died, The Lancet medical journal reported.

And death from any cause was also higher in the hormone drugs group. 

Ten years on, the cancer was nearly three times as likely to recur in patients who were only taking drugs. 

 

However, among men having radiotherapy, there was a slightly higher rate of long-term side effects of urinary, rectal and sexual problems.

Professor Anders Widmark, of Umea University, led the study. He believes the combined treatment was 'significantly superior' to hormone treatment alone. It resulted in a 'substantial' reduction in deaths, with a 10 per cent improvement in overall survival, he added. 

'The quality of life and adverse effect profile of radiotherapy is acceptable. This should be the new standard of care for these patients.' 

Dr Chris Parker, of the Institute of Cancer Research in the UK, said the 'pivotal' trial shows the benefits of radiotherapy as local treatment for prostate cancer. 

'The results should change current practice, making long-term hormonal therapy plus radical radiotherapy the standard of care for men with locally advanced prostate cancer.' 

And John Neate, of The Prostate Cancer Charity, said: 'It does seem to represent real progress in treatment for men with locally advanced prostate cancer - where the cancer has spread just outside the prostate gland. 

'This research is about men, not mice or cells, and it gives doctors clear information on the benefit of giving a course of radiotherapy, as well as long-term hormone treatment, in men with locally advanced prostate cancers. 

'The study also offers information on the possible risks. 

'While we welcome the undoubted potential progress in terms of lives saved, it is important not to dismiss the increased risk of long-term side effects on gut, bladder and sexual function. 

'However, some progress in minimising the adverse effects on quality of life in combining a course of radiotherapy with hormone therapy, may already be on the way. 

'Current medical practice now means the dose of radiotherapy is bigger and better targeted - hitting the cancer more forcefully with less chance of damage to healthy tissues.' 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

