TITLE	Home

 The controversial footballer caused outrage with a shocking foul-mouthed rant directly into a TV camera during a Premier League clash with West Ham on Saturday. And he has reacted angrily to the news that his two-match ban has been upheld by Premier League bosses, saying the decision 'doesn't seem right' 

 Police pulled the body of Anthony Soh (pictured) from the popular Serpentine lake in Hyde Park, Central London just before lunchtime yesterday after a walker spotted a body. 

 Denise Fergus wants their 'cloak of secrecy' removed and has called for the prosecution of the guard Venables had sex with along with those who tried to cover up the story. 

 Twenty men turned up for the event at the Cape of Good Hope pub in Oxford, but all went home alone, with their entrance fee reimbursed. 

 Staff at Darwen Vale High School in Lancashire picketed the school gates brandishing placards, with around 70 teachers involved. 

 Rich Dart, 28, was pictured hanging out his washing on the balcony of his two-bedroom flat next to a picturesque canal in Bow, East London. 

 The General Medical Council took the action pending a hearing involving paediatric cardiologist Dr Philipp Bonhoeffer. 

 The UK may have to give a loan of up to £4.4billion to Portugal and could also have to contribute under the rules of the International Monetary Fund. 

 The salt marsh plant Danish Scurvy Grass has spread explosively along verges and central reservations and can now be seen along motorways in the middle of Britain. 

 Inflation is running at 4.4 per cent but the Bank of England's experts have still refused to raise interest rates from their historic low. 

 Rappelling from a helicopter, the troops also rescued seven others as forces stormed the gates of Laurent Gbagbo's home in Abidjan. 

 The teenager has been sentenced to 18 months youth detention at Chelmsford Crown Court after his two-year spree in Essex left victims 'emotional and hysterical'. 

 Caren Paterson, 33, collapsed in her flat in Islington, London, before her boyfriend made three frantic 999 calls pleading for an ambulance to arrive. 

 No longer happy with a bed time story, youngsters now have to be bribed to go to bed as parents tackle the nightly cries of 'just let me get to the end of this level'. 

 The giants have been involved in a vicious tit-for-tat battle in recent months as they vie to be known as the cheapest of the 'big four' supermarkets. 

 Commanders have told David Cameron that the rebels lack the numbers and the organisation to oust Libyan dictator Colonel Gaddafi without fresh supplies and expertise. 

 Matthew Simmons, 36, gained notoriety when the French striker launched a flying kick at him as Simmons supported Crystal Palace in January 1995. 

 Lord Rees, whose research delves deep into the mysteries of the cosmos, has won the 2011 Templeton Prize for 'career achievements which affirm life's spiritual dimension.' 

 An alleged rapist with a severe case of haemorrhoids had his trial adjourned so his lawyers could find him a special medicated cushion to sit on. 

 Some 26,500 claims were lodged in November and December taking the year's total to more than 72,000. They were worth a massive £9.98million. 

 Brendon Flynn, 13, was pronounced dead just before 6pm on Monday, after being found at his family home in Huyton, Merseyside. 

 A brazen thief added insult to injury when he racked up a $2,400 bill on a Rhode Island woman's credit card - then sent her a bouquet of flowers to say thank you. 

 In an extraordinarily candid interview, the Deputy Prime Minister said he &#8216;cries regularly to music&#8217; and admitted the vitriolic criticism levelled at him had left its mark. 

 Members of the public will go on the beat in parts of Greater Manchester, wearing high-visibility jackets as part of a national trial to help the police combat crime. 

 Kelly Fannin, pictured, who has five children from four different fathers, is facing jail after she breached a two year suspended sentence for stealing from shops in October 2009. 

 Xin Shi was at St Nicholas's Cathedral, Newcastle, when Ronald Bowe snatched his bag with the iPad, two phones and cash inside. 

 A consumer group has found that the more expensive premium petrol and diesel fail to deliver the efficiency needed to justify the price difference. 

 The Most Rev Vincent Nichols has put his name to a petition to save The Cardinal pub after it was confirmed there were plans for it to revert to its old name, The Windsor Castle. 

 Mr Cameron offered a series of concessions over the Coalition&#8217;s plans to axe swathes of NHS management and put GPs in charge of commissioning services. 

 Waiter Mustafa Kantar has not worked since Tim Miller, the man behind reality TV show Come Dine With Me, complained about his bill at the Park Lane Hilton, London. 

 Britain's wind farms produce far less electricity than their supporters claim &#8211; and cannot be relied upon to keep the lights on, says a study from a conservation charity. 

 Officers have released the CCTV stills showing the man at a pub - the Cotes Park Inn - near the murder scene within an hour of her death. 

 Thomas Parker, 56, was arrested but his brother Ken fled from a nearby van in the sleepy village of Quillan in the south of France, it emerged today. 

 In the past firefighters and police officers have been afraid to put their lives at risk because of legislation, such as the PCSOs who stood by when Jordan Lyon drowned as they were not trained. 

 Michael Lyons attended the bash, hosted by director general Mark Thompson, which cost the BBC in excess of £30,000. 

 Robert 'Bobby' Titcomb, 49 - a long time friend of the president - was arrested after he allegedly approached an undercover police officer posing as a prostitute in the down town area of Honolulu 

 Nearly half of easyJet pilots surveyed said they were suffering from significant fatigue and a fifth reported that their abilities were compromised in flight. 

 Professor David Eastwood, from the University of Birmingham, said that the Government should address student numbers through deregulation on places. 

 The World Health Organisation has said that less than a handful of antibitoics are currently in the pipeline to combat resistant bacteria, creating a "nightmare scenario". 

Scroll through for the most amazing stories from around the globe

 The shut down will take place at the end of April from 26 to 28 inclusive after Nissan confirmed 'temporary operational difficulties' due to supply problems from beleaguered Japan. 

 The Prime Minister and Samantha Cameron flew with the low-cost airline as millions in the UK baked in the hottest April 6 on record which is set to continue this weekend. 

 Robin Garbutt, 45, is accused of bludgeoning 40-year-old Diana three times over the head as she slept in their living quarters above The Village Shop and Post Office in Melsonby, North Yorkshire, last March. 

 Jay Severin of Boston-based station WTKK-FM was discussing the sexual assault lawsuits against American Apparel boss Dov Charney, when he made the revelation. 

 'Must be Tories. They reckon it's two quid well spent.' 

 The 57-year-old disgraced politician John Edwards is said to be deeply depressed over the prospect of a criminal trial that could end with him being jailed if found guilty. 

 John Hemming wants the Commons to launch an arcane process that could threaten legal action against judges who hand out blanket secrecy orders. 

Scroll through more of the most amazing stories from around the globe

 The man, who was flying from Portland, Oregon, has been given a free flight, and the airline acknowledges he should have been moved to an exit row instead of being ejected. 

 Rescuers in the Lake District say a new generation is relying on the navigational apps - but they cannot use a traditional map and compass. 

 Jennifer Dennison is alleged to have helped herself to more than $500,000 to finance her addiction to slot machines at her local casino in Florida. 

Is a two-match ban for F-word Rooney excessive?

 Sufferers of age-related macular degeneration &#8211; the most common cause of blindness in the elderly &#8211; are among those who could benefit within years. 

 Campaigners say it will be the biggest breakthrough in beating bowel cancer for a generation, stopping 5,000 cases developing and preventing 3,000 deaths annually. 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

