TITLE	Male circumcision 'may protect women against cervical cancer'

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 9:20 AM on 18th December 2008

Men who have been circumcised gain double protection against AIDS and the virus that causes cervical cancer in women, research shows.

Three new studies show that circumcision reduces the risk of both sexually transmitted infections in men and possibly their future sexual partners.

The reports, published in the Journal of Infectious Diseases, will fuel the debate over whether men - and newborn boys - should be circumcised. 

Men and women can catch human papilloma virus - the virus that causes cervical cancer - if they have sex with someone else who has it. 

The virus is common. About half of women are infected at some time in their lives.

Condoms lower women's chances of contracting HPV but do not rule it out.

However, the latest findings show that women are less likely to become infected if their partner has been circumcised. 

Dr. Bertran Auvert of the University of Versailles in France and colleagues in South Africa tested more than 1,200 men visiting a clinic in South Africa.

They found under 15 per cent of the circumcised men and 22 per cent of the uncircumcised men were infected with the human papilloma virus, or HPV, which is the main cause of cervical cancer and genital warts.

'This finding explains why women with circumcised partners are at a lower risk of cervical cancer than other women,' they said.

A second paper looking at U.S. men had less clear-cut results, but Carrie Nielson, of Oregon Health  and  Science University and colleagues, said they found some indication that circumcision might protect men.

The circumcised men were about half as likely to have HPV as uncircumcised men, after adjustment for other differences between the two groups.

Preventing AIDS 

In the third report, Lee Warner of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and colleagues tested African-American men in Baltimore and found 10 per cent of those at high risk of infection with HIV who were circumcised had the virus, compared to 22 per cent of those who were not.

'Circumcision was associated with substantially reduced HIV risk in patients with known HIV exposure,' said the researchers.

Previous studies supporting circumcision to reduce HIV transmission had all been done in Africa. Results from other countries were less clear.

More than 80,000 people living in the UK, and 33 million people globally, are infected with AIDS, which has no cure and no vaccine. 

One in three people with HIV are undiagnosed.

HPV is the most common sexually transmitted infection in the world, with 20 million people in the United States infected. 

It causes cervical cancer, which kills 300,000 women globally every year. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

