TITLE	Alert for women on cancer dangers in hair dye

by TIM UTTON, Daily Mail

Fears over the safety of hair dyes intensified yesterday after a European Commission watchdog withdrew support for the products.

The scientific panel said there is not enough evidence to prove that such dyes, linked in recent studies to bladder cancer and rheumatoid arthritis, are safe.

Concerned consumers have been advised to stop using them. The highest risks are associated with dark-coloured, permanent dyes used every four to six weeks.

Millions of women regularly dye their hair and the market for the products is worth &pound; 175million in the UK alone.

The watchdog's decision comes after research indicating monthly users more than double their risk of bladder cancer. The results prompted the European Commission to ask manufacturers for details of safety tests.

Dr Ian White, chairman of the Scientific Committee on Cosmetic and Non-Food Products and consultant dermatologist at St Thomas' Hospital in London, said: 'They have not provided ample information that the dye is safe. Isn't it amazing that a product should have such wide gaps in its toxicological requirements but be on sale?'

In its report, the committee called on the European Commission to act to protect consumers.

'The European cosmetic industry uses a number of permanent hair dyes and the safety of these has not yet been assessed by authorities,' it said.

'The committee is of the opinion that the information submitted is insufficient to allow for an adequate risk assessment. Accordingly, it is not possible to assess the safe use of the substance.

'Any robust epidemiological investigation in Europe would take years, but there is a need for measures to protect the consumer in the interim.'

Scientists are particularly worried about the long-term effects of PPD, or para-Phenylenediamine, used in dark hair dyes.

The report added: 'There are indications derived from experiments in rats that PPD may be carcinogenic upon long-term application with hydrogen peroxide.' The Cancer Research Society advised concerned consumers to stop using the products until further research has been completed.

Research in Sweden suggested that chemicals found in colouring products might damage the immune system, triggering rheumatoid arthritis.

And an investigation of 1,500 people with bladder cancer in California found women who used permanent hair dyes once a month were twice as likely to get the disease.

Some hairdressers were 50 per cent more likely to have bladder cancer. In the UK each year there are more than 12,000 new cases and 4,900 deaths from the cancer.

Certain chemicals have already been shown to cause the disease, including those used in the painting and dyeing industries.

The Cosmetic, Toiletry and Perfumery Association said: 'The industry considers consumer safety to be paramount and will continue to co-operate with the European Commission.

'Hair colourants are among the most thoroughly studied products on the market and studies to date have concluded that they are safe when used as directed.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

