TITLE	Obesity and cancer linked, warn scientists

by TIM UTTON, Daily Mail

Women in their 50s who are overweight run twice the risk of getting breast cancer, scientists warned yesterday.

Obesity is the biggest known reason for post- menopausal women to have boosted levels of oestrogen and testosterone.

High levels of these sex hormones double the risk of breast cancer, Cancer Research UK said.

This could ultimately lead to a blood test to detect those at risk of the disease.

But obese women should make more effort to lose weight if they want to reduce their chances of developing breast cancer, it warned.

Dr Tim Key, who led the research, said: 'We've known for some time that reproductive and hormonal factors were involved in the development of breast cancer.

'But until now we haven't had strong evidence for a direct link between the blood levels of natural hormones and risk of the disease.

'Our study confirms that high levels of sex hormones can raise risk.

'In the future, our research may allow testing to predict a woman's risk of breast cancer and could provide leads for improved drugs to help prevent the disease.

'But meanwhile it's important that women try to maintain a healthy weight, since this will reduce their blood oestrogen levels and breast cancer risk.'

Scientists from Cancer Research UK in Oxford studied 2,428 postmenopausal women from the UK, U.S, Italy and Japan, including 663 who had breast cancer.

Blood samples were taken, levels of sex hormone measured and each woman's progress followed to see which developed breast cancer.

By analysing the results, scientists were able for the first time to estimate the effect of hormones.

High levels of testosterone and oestrogen more than doubled the risk of breast cancer, they found.

Women with raised levels of a separate substance, sex hormone --binding globulin, had reduced hormone levels and a lower cancer risk.

Obese women had low levels of this globulin, a factor which probably also helped to raise their risk of breast cancer.

The findings are reported in this week's Journal of the National Cancer Institute.

Sir Paul Nurse, director general of Cancer Research UK, said: 'Obesity is responsible for about 7 per cent of the UK's cancer deaths.

'This important study establishes one of the reasons for this link, highlighting the importance of maintaining a healthy weight.

'And in the future, it may be possible to reduce the risk of cancer in women with high levels of sex hormones.'

The findings follow research which shows Britain has the third-highest rate of increase in obesity in the world, with levels rapidly approaching those in the U.S.

Three adults in five are overweight and almost 10 per cent of children under four are obese.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

