TITLE	Taking vitamins 'fails to lower risk of getting cancer'

 By Ryan Kisiel Last updated at 9:37 AM on 31st December 2008

Taking vitamin supplements for years fails to lower your overall risk of suffering cancer, according to a new study.

Researchers also found that beta carotene, vitamin C and vitamin E supplements had no effect on preventing cancer.

The findings, published in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, followed two other important studies that also concluded that antioxidant supplements did not prevent cancer.

Dr JoAnn Manson, who carried out the research for Harvard Medical School in Boston, America, said: 'Although a healthful dietary pattern rich in fruits and vegetables may lower cancer risk, such benefits cannot be mimicked by simply popping a few vitamin supplements.'

The study tracked 7,627 women who were of an average age of 60 years and had taken supplements for more than nine years.

The experiment saw patients take 500 milligrams of vitamin C daily,  vitamin E tablets every other day or 50 milligrams of beta carotene every other day - or various combinations of the three supplements.

Others were given placebos to act as a yardstick compared to the patients given vitamins.

The findings showed that women who took the supplements had similar rates of cancer and cancer deaths compared to those who took a placebo.

But the study suggested that vitamin E supplements might reduce colon cancer risk and that beta carotene supplements might modestly raise lung cancer risk.

However, medical experts acknowledged that while the women took the supplements for almost a decade, the study may not be long enough to measure the full effects against cancer.

Dr Manson added: 'Simply taking antioxidant supplements is insufficient to prevent cancer. People should take more natural plant foods which are rich with many nutrients including but not limited to antioxidants.'

Beta carotene, vitamin E and vitamin C are antioxidants are believed to protect against damage caused by substances in the body called free radicals that can harm cells, tissues and organs.

Fruits and vegetables are rich in these vitamins, and it has been shown that people who eat plenty of these foods have a lower risk of heart disease, cancer and other conditions.

In a study released in November involving about 15,000 male doctors, vitamin E and C supplements was found not to lower cancer risk. 

Another study published in October found no cancer reduction in 35,000 men taking vitamin E and other vitamin supplements.

It also comes after an American study found that selenium or Vitamin E did not reduce the risk of prostate cancer in men.

Since the Sixties, scientists have thought that selenium supplements might help prevent the cancer because some areas of the world where people have a naturally high intake of the mineral have lower-than-expected rates of the disease.

Selenium is a trace mineral found in brazil nuts, grain, fish and meat while vitamin E is an antioxidant also thought to cut the chances of developing cancer.

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

