TITLE	Eat an egg a day for a bonny baby and how measles could fight cancer

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 11:46 AM on 13th January 2009

Could an egg a day help women produce bigger  -  and healthier  -  babies? 

That's the theory being tested in a new trial at Rutgers University in New Jersey, where women are having an egg a day from their fourth or fifth month of pregnancy onwards. Foetal growth will be measured to test the egg effect. 

It's known that poor nutrition during pregnancy can lay the foundations for the child's health well into adult life. 

Previous research has confirmed eggs as a good source of nutrition during pregnancy. During this time women need more protein, omega-3 fatty acids and vitamins and minerals, including folate, iron and zinc, which have been linked to improved development and lowering of the risk of birth defects. 

Eggs contain all these, as well as iodine and choline. 

The general advice during pregnancy is to eat only well-cooked eggs. 

A revolutionary new hearing test that produces accurate results in seconds could soon be available for use in GP surgeries, workplaces and schools. Current tests take around 25 minutes to carry out at a specialist clinic. 

 

The new hand-held device tests how the inner ear responds to different frequencies and volumes. 'It's rather like projecting sound onto a wall and monitoring the echo,' said a spokesman for Sensaurial, the Oxfordshire-based company behind the device. 

Each portable unit costs £500  -  far cheaper than a large hospital-based laboratory with conventional equipment which can cost as much as £20,000. 

Pre-clinical trials have been positive; formal trials will begin this year at Heartlands hospital in Birmingham. 

The measles virus could be an unlikely new weapon in the fight against prostate cancer. 

Scientists at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, have found a way of modifying the virus so that it turns into a powerful anti-cancer treatment. Although the research is still in its early stages, laboratory tests show the modified virus can destroy prostate cancer cells. 

Prostate cancer is the most common form of cancer among men in the UK, with 32,000 cases diagnosed every year. 

Early warning signs can include difficulty or pain when urinating. 

Once the cancer migrates from the prostate, it spreads to the bones in an estimated 85 per cent of victims. 

In a report published in The Prostate journal, the researchers said: 'These measles strains can effectively infect, replicate in and kill prostate cancer cells.' 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

