TITLE	Could this pill cure sunburn?

by MARTYN HALLE, Daily Mail

Scientists have developed the sun-lover's dream - a tablet that can help protect against sunburn and the risk of skin cancer.

Researchers found that the pill, specially formulated to protect the digestive tract from cancer, also prevents the skin from burning.

Made from algae found in the pure waters of the Pacific around Hawaii, the pill contains an antioxidant ten times stronger than beta-carotene (vitamin A) and 550 times stronger than vitamin E.

Both vitamins are known to be protective against cancer and vitamin E is particularly useful in providing the protection skin needs against ultra-violet light.

American company Cyanotech developed the BioAstin pill as a nutritional supplement. It had no idea of its potential as an anti-sunburn pill until the firm started getting reports from customers who normally burned easily.

'We were pleasantly surprised but hadn't realised that BioAstin might have these properties in protecting skin,' says Kelly Moorhead a senior biologist at Cyanotech. 'So we decided to mount a clinical trial.'

Results showed that volunteers taking two tablets of BioAstin twice a day for two weeks had 50 per cent greater protection against the harmful rays of the sun than those who didn't.

'We used UV light to simulate the sun and the people who took BioAstin had hardly any reddening of the skin,' says Ms Moorhead.

The ability of BioAstin to protect the skin is due to a compound called astaxanthin, the active ingredient in the algae that protects the organism from sunlight.

Astaxanthin is also responsible for the natural red colouring in the skins of salmon, trout and shrimps.

'This is a powerful compound that gets right into the skin giving it a layer of protection,' says Ms Moorhead.

People taking BioAstin need to build up levels of astaxanthin in their skin to boost UV protection, and it is recommended that they take one or two tablets a day from early summer. But Cyanotech stresses that taking a pill to protect against sunburn is not a licence to go out and expose yourself to the sun for hours.

'The pill gives added protection and appears to reduce the need for suncreams and lotions, but we would always suggest that those are still used,' added Ms Moorhead.

According to Cancer Research UK, skin cancer is the UK's fastest growing cancer killer. But one in seven Britons still do not use a sunscreen.

There are about 40,000 new cases each year, causing around 2,000 deaths.

The most serious form, malignant melanoma, causes around 75 per cent of all deaths from skin cancer but can be treated if caught early.

Linda, a 39 year- old housewife, who lives in Paignton, Devon, is allergic to most suntan lotions but worries about skin cancer as she has fair skin.

She put BioAstin to the test last year when she went on holiday to California with her husband and two sons.

'I go red very easily even with only a small amount of exposure to the sun,' she says. 'We were away for three weeks and the temperature was up to 40C with blazing sunshine.

'I started taking the tablets a week or two before going away.

'I should have started going red within a few hours of setting down in California, but, to my surprise, my skin started to turn a lovely light brown. I didn't burn at all. It was a great feeling.

'I don't plan to go crazy in the sun, but now I know I can expose myself a little without turning the colour of a lobster.'

For information about BioAstin telephone 0870 872 0150, or visit website www.lifelongproducts.co.uk or www.cyanotech.com.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

