TITLE	Can a £40 holiday jab prevent skin cancer? Promising new research shows vaccine can reduce up to 70% of cases

 By Pat Hagan Last updated at 8:46 PM on 12th January 2009

A £40 travel jab given to thousands of British holiday-makers every year could also prevent the most deadly form of skin cancer. 

New research shows the yellow fever vaccine could slash the risk of malignant melanoma by up to 70 per cent. 

It works by &#8216;priming&#8217; the immune system to be on the alert for changes in cells that could lead to a melanoma. 

Scientists have discovered the earlier the vaccine is used, the better. Skin cancer can take years to develop and the jab works best if given before cells begin to mutate within the skin. 

 It raises the possibility that the vaccine, which has a better safety record than many others, could be used in childhood to protect against the disease later in life, providing further studies support the latest findings.

 

 Malignant melanoma kills around 1,700 people a year and is the third most common cancer in people aged 15 to 39. Over-exposure to the sun&#8217;s rays is the biggest cause and since the mid-1990s there has been a 24 per cent increase in cases in the UK. 

Some evidence suggests even a few early bouts of sunburn in childhood can be enough to trigger the cellular changes in moles that lead to skin cancer later in life. 

 Cells within moles become cancerous and start to divide uncontrollably, eventually spreading through the body. So far, the only proven way of reducing risk is to protect the skin against sunburn by using high protection creams and wearing suitable clothing. But scientists have recently discovered the yellow fever vaccine, given to thousands of tourists heading for tropical climates in Africa and South America, seems to &#8216;power up&#8217; the immune system to fight early cellular changes. 

When skin cells, called melanocytes, become malignant they produce tiny amounts of a substance called HERV-K-MEL. 

This substance sends a signal to the immune system to release antibodies to try to fight the rogue cells. It&#8217;s thought this immune system response is too weak to halt aggressive cancers such as melanoma once they have set in. 

But if the immune system could be put on &#8216;red alert&#8217; before cancerous changes even begin, it would have a better chance of destroying rogue cells as soon as they appear. 

Tests show the yellow fever vaccine contains a very similar substance to HERV-KMEL that prompts the immune system to release antibodies into the blood ready for any cancer &#8216;attack&#8217;. 

In the latest research, an international team of experts from the UK, Italy, Germany and the Netherlands studied more than 28,000 patients to see if having the vaccine affected their chances of cancer. 

The results, published in the journal Vaccine, showed the risk of melanoma was reduced by up to 70 per cent in those who had the jab. 

But the risks only started to fall at least ten years after the vaccine was given. 

The reasons are unclear, but researchers think because skin cancer can take decades to develop, it may be crucial the jab is used before any &#8216;hidden&#8217; changes in skin cells. 

In a report on their findings they said vaccines may only offer protection if given &#8216;during the first few years of life&#8217;. 

They added: &#8216;The results suggest a simple preventive strategy is possible. But the immune response needed may have to be induced by vaccination long before the tumour is clinically evident.&#8217; 

More than 400 million people around the world have been vaccinated against yellow fever since the drug first emerged in the late 1930s.

Only one in 100,000 people suffers a severe adverse reaction, a better safety record than many other vaccines. 

Dr Joanna Owens from Cancer Research UK said: &#8216;This is interesting research. But it needs more detailed follow-up studies and we are a long way from being able to say this vaccine will protect against melanoma. 

&#8216;The best way to reduce your risk of melanoma is still to stay safe in the sun.&#8217; 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

