TITLE	Three cups of tea a day 'slashes breast cancer risk' for under 50s

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 1:16 PM on 21st January 2009

Just three cups of tea a day could slash the risk of breast cancer in young women, according to new research.

The chances of developing a tumour dropped by around 37 per cent in women under 50 who drank tea at least three times daily.

But older women who consumed similar amounts did not see any benefit, the study found.

Researchers think the anti-cancer properties of tea may have a more potent effect on the types of tumours that tend to grow in younger women.

Around 40,000 women a year in Britain are diagnosed with breast cancer. The disease affects one in nine women at some point in their lives.

Risk factors range from being overweight and having a family history of the disease to smoking and going through the menopause.

Although the health benefits of tea are well known, most of the evidence centres on heart disease.

A study last year showed four cups a day could reduce the risk of a heart attack.

But other recent studies suggest tea can protect against skin cancer, ovarian cancer and even weak bones.

Britain consumes around 165 million cups of tea day - double the amount of coffee.

The nation's favourite hot drink is packed with powerful disease-fighting chemicals, called polyphenols.

To study its effect on breast tumours, a team of US researchers led by Dr Nagi Kumar at the Moffitt Cancer Centre in Tampa, Florida, studied 5,000 women aged between 20 and 74 who had been treated for breast cancer.

They compared medical histories and lifestyles with a similar group of women free of breast cancer.

The results, published in the journal Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers and Prevention, showed tea did not appear to protect older women against the disease.

But in women under 50, those drinking three cups or more a day were 37 per cent less likely to have tumours than women who drank no tea at all.

The benefits were even greater when it came to 'lobular' breast cancer,  with tea reducing the risk by 66 per cent.

Lobular cancer, where cancer affects the lobes deep inside breast tissue, accounts for one in ten cases of the disease.

It can be hard to detect, so is often quite advanced by the time it is diagnosed.

In a report on the findings, the researchers said: 'Regular tea consumption, particularly at moderately high levels, might reduce breast cancer risk in younger women.

'Given that tea is the most common beverage consumed in the world, it makes an attractive candidate for breast cancer prevention.' 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

