TITLE	It's not just lung cancer, smoking 'is tied to 70% of ALL male cancer deaths'

 Last updated at 3:42 PM on 22nd January 2009

Smoking contributes to a substantial 70 per cent of male cancer deaths, twice as many as previously thought, researchers reveal. 

Men who smoke tobacco are at risk of dying from much more than lung cancer, the U.S. team warns.

Upping tobacco control could save many more lives than previously estimated, the team, led by Bruce Leisthikow from the University of California at Massachusetts, stresses.

The analysis, published online in BMC Cancer, linked smoking to more than 70 per cent of cancer death among men living in Massachusetts in 2003. 

This burden is more than twice as large as the previous estimate of 34 per cent in 2001.

&#8216;This study provides support for the growing understanding among researchers that smoking is a cause of many more cancer deaths besides lung cancer,&#8217; said lead author Bruce Leistikow, a professor of public health sciences. 

&#8216;The full impacts of tobacco smoke, including second-hand smoke, have been overlooked in the rush to examine such potential cancer factors as diet and environmental contaminants. As it turns out, much of the answer was probably smoking all along.&#8217;

Has the smoking ban been a waste of time?

Leistikow used National Center for Health Statistics data to compare death rates from lung cancer to death rates from all other cancers among men in Massachusetts. 

The assessment revealed that the two rates changed in tandem year-by-year from 1979 to 2003, with the strongest association among men aged 30-to-74 years.

The very close relationship over 25 years between lung and other cancer death rates suggests a single cause for both - tobacco smoke, the authors concluded.

Leistikow, whose research is dedicated to uncovering the causes of premature mortality, said: &#8216;The fact that lung and non-lung cancer death rates are almost perfectly associated means that smokers and non-smokers alike should do what they can to avoid tobacco smoke. 

&#8216;It also suggests that increased attention should be paid to smoking prevention in health care reforms and health promotion campaigns.&#8217;

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

