TITLE	'My cancer was cured - thanks to a tiny baby'

 By Carol Davis Last updated at 12:59 PM on 27th January 2009

One Sunday afternoon as I was Christmas shopping, I started feeling unwell. I was short of breath and had a sharp pain just below my diaphragm every time I breathed in.

After three days the pain hadn't gone, so I saw my GP. He thought it was a virus, but sent me for a blood test the next day just in case.

That evening, he called me. The blood test showed raised numbers of white blood cells, which could be a sign of leukaemia - cancer of the white blood cells. As a nurse, I know how serious leukaemia is and I was in total shock - I'd always been so healthy.

That night, my partner Alan drove me to Kettering General Hospital, where I had more blood tests and was given a bed. I couldn't sleep a wink because I was so worried. The next morning, the consultant confirmed it was chronic myeloid leukaemia and said I needed immediate chemotherapy.

The pain when I breathed in was caused by my spleen, which was swollen with the abnormal white blood cells. My body was also producing fewer of the red blood cells which carry oxygen. That was why I was breathless.

I spent the next five weeks in hospital. I lost all my hair and had constant nausea and vomiting. The treatment controlled the cancer but didn't cure it, so I was told I'd need a bone marrow transplant. First they'd destroy my old bone marrow - where blood is made but which also contained the leukaemia cells - and replace it with healthy donor bone marrow, which would go on to produce healthy blood.

Neither my sister nor my children were a good match, so I was placed on various bone marrow registers. It was scary because there was no guarantee a match would be found, and this was my only chance of a cure.

By March 2008, with no match found, my consultant decided to look for matches from umbilical cord blood. He explained that cells taken from babies' donated cords can now be used for bone marrow transplants.

The cords are rich in stem cells, which can grow into healthy blood. And because newborns have not been exposed to infections, their stem cells are less likely to attack your immune system.

At the moment, few mothers know about this, so many umbilical cords are simply thrown away, when they could be used for life-saving medical treatment 

In May, I was overjoyed when I got a call to say a cord blood match had been found. A week later, I saw Professor Nigel Russell at Nottingham University Hospital - one of the first in the UK to use this treatment.

A week before the transfusion, at the end of July, I was admitted for chemotherapy and radiotherapy to destroy my existing bone marrow cells, and kept in isolation because my immune system had been destroyed.

The transfusion itself took about 30 minutes, with the cord blood through a tube going into my chest. I had blood tests every day and left hospital four weeks later when my white blood cell count had recovered. I was still very weak, and I had to avoid crowded places in case I caught an infection.

I saw Professor Russell every week, and by last September tests showed the leukaemia was in remission and my white blood cells were all being produced from the healthy cord blood.

I feel enormous gratitude to my consultants - and to that special mother and baby who saved my life.

THE SURGEON 

Nigel Russell is professor of haematology at Nottingham University Hospital's NHS Trust.

He says: The first line of treatment in cancer of the blood is chemotherapy, but if that fails then doctors consider a bone marrow transplant. Around 1,100 patients in Britain have these transplants every year - mainly for leukaemia but also for disorders such as sickle cell anaemia. 

A good match is important if the patient's body is not to reject the healthy donor bone marrow. Thirty per cent of patients find a match among their relatives; another 50 per cent are successfully matched with donors from bone marrow registers. 

If a match cannot be found, it's likely the patient will die because there is nothing else we can do. 

Over the past few years, we have started using blood from a baby's umbilical cord, which is rich in stem cells that create blood. 

For patients such as Mrs Knight, where there was no suitable match and a high risk of the cancer returning, cord blood is an exciting alternative. It's still vital to get a reasonable match because of the danger of graft vs host disease, where donor cells attack the immune system and which can be fatal. 

In the future, stem cells from cord blood could be used for all bone marrow transplants, and eventually for tissue repair and even to grow organs. 

Cord blood is taken from a baby's umbilical cord soon after birth, but only a handful of hospitals are collecting it because it's quite specialised and needs careful storage. 

A machine is used to spin the blood and separate off the stem cells. These are then frozen until needed (the rest of the blood is discarded). Once we have found a match, the patient has chemotherapy, and sometimes radiotherapy, to destroy their cancerous white blood cells. 

We use relatively few stem cells - around 100ml - which are given like a blood transfusion. Once in the bloodstream, the cells find their way to the bone marrow - we're not sure how - and start producing healthy blood cells. 

Patients spend several weeks in hospital while their immune system recovers. We have seen Mrs Knight regularly since her treatment in July and she is doing very well. I'm very excited that this procedure could help so many others in the future. 

&#8226; The procedure costs the NHS around £60,000. 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

