TITLE	Tanning drug could 'mask the signs of cancer'

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 12:17 AM on 28th January 2009

 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

 

Sun-lovers who inject themselves with an illegal tanning drug are at risk of rapidly changing moles, skin experts warn. 

They say using Melanotan, an unlicensed medicine dubbed the 'tan jab', could lead to skin cancer being wrongly diagnosed or possibly even missed. 

The jab, which costs around £250 and can be bought over the internet or under the counter in health clubs, works by tricking the skin to make melanin, the dark pigment needed for a tan. 

Although the drug was hailed a 'paradise pill' after it emerged side effects included increased libido, there have been growing concerns over its safety. 

Writing in the British Medical Journal, researchers from Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust revealed how two patients attended their dermatology clinic with rapidly changing moles and an intense tan after injecting the two types of the drug, Melanotan I and II. 

A woman of 48 had two moles which had increased in size and darkened since injecting the drug, while another 30-year-old woman found several moles on her back had darkened. Both were later found to be benign. 

Dr Ewan Langan, who led the study, said use of Melanotan could confuse diagnoses.

 Malignant moles could be mistakenly diagnosed as benign if doctors believe their change in colour has been caused by the drug.

Trials of Melanotan in the US were halted amid concerns the drug was causing dangerous rises in blood pressure.

Some users complained of nausea and flushing while others noticed new moles or freckles or that existing ones got darker. 

Lack of testing means the drug has never been licensed for use in Britain or any other country. 

Melanotan is sold as a powder, which should be dissolved in sterile water, or ready mixed. 

Users inject themselves daily until their skin has reached the desired colour. After this, weekly boosters keep the tan topped up. 

A BBC investigation found growing numbers of people are visiting needle exchanges to get clean needles to inject the drug. 

The drug safety watchdog, the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), last month  warned consumers to avoid Melanotan. 

The MHRA issued warnings to 18 British-based websites selling the drug, which mean that any carrying on marketing it could face prosecution. 

The regulator said that it not been tested for safety, quality or effectiveness and that its side-effects were unknown.

It also warned of serious safety issues around the use of needles to inject the substance. 

A spokeswoman said 'This  drug is not licensed anywhere in the world. We don't know what the short- or long-term side effects are because there have been no thorough clinical trials carried out.

'We don't know what the health risks are and people should therefore steer clear of it.' Ed Yong, of Cancer Research UK, said 'There are good reasons why selling Melanotan in the UK is illegal.   

'This product hasn't been tested for safety and it could have serious side effects, as this new report suggests.   

'If people want to look tanned, without risking their health, they would be better off using a fake tan product on their skin.   

'And remember that any tan will only provide minimal protection against heavy doses of the sun's ultraviolet rays.' 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

