TITLE	The health benefits of the great outdoors

by ROSALIND RYAN, femail.co.uk

The countryside is not just a pretty place. Studies show it can cut recovery times from illnesses, fight against cancer and boost your mood.

We bring you the next installment in our guide to the health benefits of the countryside.

Professor Roger Ulrich, a leading expert in the benefits of natural green space, says the countryside and open areas can boost your recovery after surgery or a major illness.

He studied a group of US patients who were recovering from gall-bladder surgery. The patients were divided into two groups with half put into rooms with a view of trees and half with a view of buildings.

The study found that patients with a natural view needed less pain relieving medication, were more cooperative - making them better patients - and went home two to three days sooner than the group given buildings to look at.

Mark Dixon from the NUFU says this shows trees have a financial as well as health benefit for hospitals.

'The trees make staff feel less stressed, improve their quality of life at work and help make them more effective. This helps hospitals save money as the staff are more efficient and the patients do not need so much medication,' he says.

Professor Ulrich has also studied the effects of greenspace on reducing our stress levels.

He conducted an experiment at the University of Texas, where volunteers were sent on a very stressful virtual car journey. After the journey, half the volunteers were taken to a park surrounded by trees.

In three minutes their heart rate, blood pressure and the muscle tension in their forehead had fallen dramatically compared to the other half of the group who were kept indoors.

Stress seriously increases the risk of heart disease and costs the NHS over &pound;100 million in medication every year. The NUFU believe that getting outside among trees can cut the amount spent on drugs and the number of working days lost every year through stress.

The main influence that the countryside has on fighting cancer is the way in which we use it. Getting out into a park or local green space normally means that we are using it to exercise and it is the exercise that can help us fight cancer.

Dr Alan Maryon Davis, director of public health for the London borough of Southwark, says, 'You can reduce your risk of developing bowel cancer, if you are doing regular exercise.

The

Beat tension with the great outdoors

evidence is very strong. Just a couple of times a week has a measurable effect. It doesn't have to be too strenuous either, just half an hour of some activity every day.'

Regular exercise can also cut your risk of breast cancer as this disease is linked to obesity. 'If you are doing regular exercise, you are controlling your body weight. This means you are less likely to suffer from obesity, cutting your risk of developing breast cancer,' says Dr Maryon Davis.

People who take regular exercise are also less likely to be smokers and non-smokers are less likely to suffer from lung cancer. But there is one cancer risk that increases when you exercise out in the country.

'In the summer time open spaces are a great magnet for sunbathers,' says Dr Maryon Davis. 'Be careful you are not increasing your risk of skin cancer - make sure you are using sun screen if you are exercising outside in the sunshine.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

