TITLE	Menopause drug once thought safer than HRT 'could raise risk of breast cancer relapse'

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 8:28 PM on 17th February 2009

 

Women with a history of breast cancer could be risking their lives by taking a synthetic steroid drug commonly used to treat menopausal symptoms, it emerged today.

Experts warned them to stay away from tibolone, widely considered to be safer than conventional hormone replacement therapy.

The drug was shown to increase the chances of breast cancer returning by 40 per cent.

Moreover 70 per cent of recurrences involved aggressive, spreading tumours which are invariably fatal.

The danger associated with tibolone was so great that the study was halted six months early, after five years.

The Dutch-led authors said tibolone should not be offered to any woman with known, past, or suspected breast cancer.

Until now the pill has been viewed as safer than conventional HRT from the point of view of breast cancer.

It is often taken by women undergoing chemotherapy for breast cancer whose treatment may push them into an early menopause.

 Tibolone is said to combat symptoms such as hot flushes, night sweats, and bone loss, while having a milder effect on breast tissue than HRT. In many women, HRT hormones are believed to increase the risk of breast cancer.

The 'Liberate' study assessed the effect of tibolone in more than 3,000 women who had undergone breast cancer surgery.

Just over half the women were given daily 2.5milligram doses of the drug. The rest received a non-active 'dummy' placebo.

The average age of women taking part in the study was 52.7, and the average time since surgery 2.7 years.

A total of 237 (15.2 per cent) of the women taking tibolone had a recurrence of cancer, compared with 165 (10.7 per cent) of those prescribed the placebo.

The study, reported in the journal The Lancet Oncology, did not assess breast cancer risk factors that may have influenced  the results, or look in detail at the women's primary tumours.

In addition more than 70 per cent of the women were undergoing adjuvant, or additional, chemotherapy treatment at the same time as taking tibolone. It was not clear how this might have affected the findings.

But the researchers wanted to err on the side of caution. 

Study leader Professor Peter Kenemens, from the VU University Medical Centre in Amsterdam, said: 'There are insufficient data to establish the safety of tibolone in women who have had breast cancer and do not require or have finished adjuvant therapy.'

No subgroup of breast cancer patients had been identified for whom the use of tibolone was safe, said the authors.

Arlene Wilkie, director of research and policy at the Breast Cancer Campaign charity, said: 'This study clearly shows that tibolone should not be taken by women with a history of breast cancer to ease menopausal symptoms. Trials are under way to determine whether any form of HRT is safe for women with breast cancer.

'For women who haven't had breast cancer a decision on whether to take HRT for short-term control of menopause symptoms must take into account whether the benefits outweigh the risks. For longer term use a doctor should assess the risk on an individual basis.'

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

