TITLE	Cancer chemical link to cooked food

Research suggesting most of the food we eat contains a chemical that may give people cancer has sent shock waves around the world.

British scientists have confirmed Swedish findings last month that "significant levels" of the chemical acrylamide occur in a wide range of processed and cooked foods.

The study focused on potatoes, crisps, breakfast cereals and rye crispbreads - but experts say other foods, including meat, may be at risk.

According to the findings, acrylamide forms naturally in foods when they are fried or baked.

However, scientists believe it also occurs in roasted, grilled and barbecued food.

Frying for longer than usual increased levels of the chemical.

The Food Standards Agency, which commissioned the work, today said it was not recommending that people change their diet or cooking habits.

But the results have so alarmed the world health community that experts are holding international meetings to discuss what should be done.

The British and Swedish findings were today being presented in Brussels to the Scientific Committee on Food which advises the European Commission on food safety.

World Health Organisation experts will also discuss the research at a meeting in Geneva next month. They are expected to recommend further studies to obtain a clearer picture of the risks.

Scientists say they do not know precisely how acrylamide gets into food and what the dangers are for human health.

Rats given doses a thousand times higher than the human consumption levels detected in Sweden developed tumours in a wide range of tissues.

But no-one knows how small a dose of the chemical may be harmful.

FSA toxicologist Dr Diane Benford said at a news conference today: "We cannot define a safe level. We have to assume that at any level of exposure there may be some risk, albeit very small."

Officially, acrylamide is described as a "probable" carcinogen, but it is being treated as a cancer-causing substance.

It is also known to be neurotoxic - damaging to the nerves. Workers exposed to the chemical have suffered numbness in their hands and feet.

Dr Andrew Wadge, head of chemical safety and toxicology at the FSA, said: "It is likely that any risks from acrylamide are not new and we have probably been exposed to them in food for generations.

"What is important now is to identify what research is required to help us understand the formation of acrylamide, how it might affect people, and what may need to be done as a result.

"We are not recommending that people change either their diet or cooking methods as a result of these studies. We are recommending that people should eat a balanced diet and a wide variety of fruit and vegetables."

The Consumers' Association described the research findings as a "worrying development".

Sue Davies, the Association's principal policy adviser, said: "More research into the implications of this study need to be carried out, including what can be done to reduce overall levels of this chemical in such a wide range of food.

"The FSA should advise people on any practical steps people can take to limit their intake of acrylamide if they wish."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

