TITLE	Worldwide alert over cancer link to our food

By JAMES CHAPMAN, Daily Mail

A worldwide alert has been sounded by scientists after they identified a cancer-causing chemical in a huge range of cooked and processed foods.

British experts found ' significant levels' of acrylamide in staples such as potatoes, crisps, crispbreads and breakfast cereals eaten by millions every day.

Acrylamide, used in the papermaking industry and as an additive in water treatment, has been linked to many different kinds of cancer, nerve damage and infertility.

Researchers at the Government's Central Science Laboratory in York fear that the chemical is formed naturally in foods when they are fried or baked. It may also occur in roasted, grilled and barbecued food, including meat.

The Food Standards Agency, which commissioned the tests, warned that the chemical should not be present in foods or, if it cannot be removed, that it should only be present at the lowest possible levels.

But the agency said it was too early to advise people to change their diets or the way they prepared food, stressing only that diets rich in fruit and vegetables were known to protect against some forms of cancer.

There are strict European rules on the amount of acrylamide allowed in food packaging - no more than 10 parts per billion.

But the FSA study found levels higher than this in staple foodstuffs.

Experts found 310 parts per billion of acrylamide in Sainsbury's potatoes after they were chipped and fried. Raw, the level was less than 10 parts per billion.

Overcooking chips increased the level of acrylamide still further, the study found. An overcooked sample of chips was found to contain 12,800 parts per billion.

Boiling potatoes, however, did not appear to increase levels of the chemical in the same way.

Three varieties of Walkers crisps tested gave results ranging from 1,220 to 1,280 parts per billion. The substance was also detected in Pringles, Kellogg's Special K, Kellogg's Rice Crispies and Ryvita.

Dr Diane Benford, a toxicologist at the FSA, said the doses given to rats that developed tumours were up to 1,000 times higher than the estimated human consumption levels.

But because acrylamide is a carcinogen that is genotoxic - meaning it disrupts and damages DNA - no amount can be considered safe.

'We cannot define a safe level. We have to assume that at any level of exposure there may be some risk,' she added.

'Exposure to genotoxic carcinogens such as acrylamide should be as low as reasonably practicable.'

Dr Benford said other experiments had linked exposure to acrylamide to nerve damage and infertility.

'We have to assume it may be present in a very wide range of cooked materials, though we are not able yet to estimate what the average intake for people in the UK is from food,' she added.

Dr Benford said it was not yet possible to give any advice to people on how to consume less acrylamide.

The agency study, which confirms the findings of Swedish scientists last month, triggered alarm around the world.

The European Commission's scientific advisory group on food met in Brussels to discuss the findings yesterday and the World Health Organisation announced that it would convene next month to consider the implications.

Both are expected to order further studies to provide a clearer picture of the risks.

Dr Andrew Wadge, the FSA's head of chemical safety and toxicity, said: 'This is a new scientific finding.

'We must examine first of all what measures might be taken, if any are possible, to reduce its formation during cooking and manufacturing processes.'

The British study was triggered by Swedish research which found evidence that acrylamide is formed in high concentrations when carbohydrate-rich foods such as rice or cereals are fried or baked.

Before then, no one had identified acrylamide at such levels in food.

The British Retail Consortium and the Food and Drink Federation issued a joint statement saying they shared the FSA's concern and welcomed its advice.

The statement added: 'How acrylamide is produced during processing and cooking is not known.

'Manufacturers and retailers are committed to working with the agency - and internationally - to establish the significance of these findings for public health and to reduce consumers' exposure.'

The cooking connection

Acrylamide is manufactured for industry as a crystalline white powder.

On the basis of tests on animals, it is considered a 'probable'human carcinogen.

Professor Peter Farmer, of the Medical Research Council at Leicester University, a world expert on acrylamide, said it had been linked to many cancers in experiments in rats, including tumours of the breast, uterus, adrenal gland, scrotum and the lining of the lungs.

Until research at Stockholm University, experts had no idea that the chemical could or would be produced during cooking.

The Swedes found levels hundreds of times higher than the international safety limits for drinking water in fast food restaurant chips and bags of potato crisps.

The research was deemed so important that the scientists took the unusual step of going public with their findings before the research had been officially published in an academic journal.

But the study was widely dismissed by other experts, making the British scientists' confirmation of the findings yesterday all the more surprising.

The risks of acrylamide, however, cannot be new. Since common cooking practices appear to form the chemical, people are likely to have been exposed for many years.

The FSA says there are 'no practical ways' in which people can currently avoid acrylamide. But they say a healthy, balanced diet limiting the amount of fried and fatty foods and including plenty of fruit and vegetables will help protect against some cancers.

Diet is said to account for between 30 and 40 per cent of cancers, but experts say it is too early to calculate whether and to what extent acrylamide might be blamed.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

