TITLE	Cancer deaths 'to DOUBLE by 2050' in 'catastrophic' rise driven by obesity crisis, warns expert

 By David Derbyshire Last updated at 11:50 PM on 22nd February 2009

The obesity epidemic will double the number of cancer deaths within 40 years, researchers will say this week. 

At least 13,000 cases of cancer are caused by obesity in Britain each year, and the numbers are rising fast. 

Yet many people are unaware of the link between the disease and being overweight. 

Now a hard-hitting report warns that obesity - caused by overeating and couch potato lifestyles - is triggering a global disaster. 

Its author, leading public health expert Professor Sir John Marmott, said seven million people die from cancer worldwide each year. The toll will rise to more than 10million by 2020. 

'It's enormous, it's catastrophic,' said Sir John, a professor of epidemiology and public health at University College London. 'The numbers are just frightening'. 

He called for the UK to take the crisis of obesity-related cancer as seriously as the threat from climate change, saying: 'After cardiovascular disease, it's the next highest cause of death in this country'. 

His report has been commissioned by the World Cancer Research Fund. In 2007, a massive study by the WCRF found that lack of exercise and poor diet were major factors in a third of cancers. 

The new report, to be published on Thursday, will include practical advice for governments and individuals. 

Obesity increases the risks of cancers of the breast, colon, uterus, kidney and oesophagus. Obesity and physical inactivity are thought to account for 25 to 30 per cent of the causes of several major cancers. 

Body fat produces hormones and growth factors such as oestrogen and insulin which can increase the risk of cancer. Obese people are also less likely to eat healthy amounts of fruit and vegetables that can protect against cancer. 

Professor Martin Wiseman, medical adviser to the World Cancer Research Fund, said: 'The evidence now shows that, after not smoking, maintaining a healthy weight is the most important thing you can do for cancer prevention. If rates of obesity continue to rise then this will have serious consequences for cancer rates in the UK. 

'Unless something happens soon to stop the increase in obesity then we are sleepwalking towards a situation where the UK will face more cancer cases than ever before. 

'Rising obesity rates are not the only reason we expect the number of cancer cases to double over the next 40 years, but they are an important factor. 

'Also, the increase in the number of overweight children is deeply troubling because the more overweight a child is, the more likely they are to be overweight as an adult. And the more overweight the population becomes, the more cases of cancer we are storing up for the future.' 

One in four men and one in three women are overweight in the UK. The numbers have risen steadily over the last 20 years.

 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

