TITLE	Cancer missed 20 times: Sue's horrifying story shows how bad doctors STILL are at spotting the silent killer

 By Isla Whitcroft Last updated at 8:20 AM on 25th February 2009

Lying on a hospital bed, delirious with pain from a grossly swollen stomach, Sue Edwards heard someone screaming. Doped up on morphine, she struggled to work out where the sound was coming from. 

'Suddenly I realised I was the one making all the noise,' says the 39-year-old mother of two from Nottinghamshire. 

'I was racked with fever and my stomach was contracting and hardening in waves of pain. I thought I was about to die.

 

 

'As the nurses rushed to comfort me and the doctor gave me yet more morphine, I was told to prepare for an emergency operation to remove the huge mass they had found in my stomach a few days earlier. It was high-risk surgery and they warned me I might not survive. 

'The worst thing was that my children were too young to visit me in hospital, so I hadn't seen them since I had been admitted. There was a good chance I might never see them again.' 

Only four days earlier, Sue's GP had told her, once again, that the symptoms she was suffering - high fever, stomach pain, swelling and extreme tiredness - were probably due to a sinus infection and the fact she was overweight. 

She'd been to see him at least 20 times over the previous year with symptoms which also included diarrhoea, loss of bladder control and swelling in her legs. 

Now she was being prepared for surgery to remove a mass that was so large it would not fit on the ultrasound screen.

Symptoms 'probably due to sinusitis' 

While this may sound like an horrific one-off, Sue's story is far from unique. The charity Target Ovarian Cancer, which has just committed £7.5 million to research and education, says many of its members have a similar story. 

Around one-third of women with ovarian cancer arrive at the oncologist with a mass that would have been clearly evident had they undergone a pelvic examination. 

'We have ladies who reported bladder problems being told they had to go away and do pelvic floor exercises,' says Annwen Jones of the charity. 'Some were assured their symptoms were down to irritable bowel syndrome, age, depression or HRT.' 

Ovarian cancer, the fourth most common cancer in women, has one of the worst survival rates of any cancer and is dubbed the silent killer because of the difficulty in distinguishing the symptoms from other conditions. Of the 6,800 women diagnosed in Britain every year - most of whom are over the age of 40 - 30 per cent will not survive beyond 12 months. 

After five years, the picture is more bleak, with just 30 per cent still alive - a death toll of 5,000 women a year. Shamefully, Britain has one of the worst ovarian cancer survival rates in Europe. 

'If ovarian cancer is caught early, survival rates shoot up to around 90 per cent,' says Professor Hani Gabra, medical director of the charity Ovarian Cancer Action and director of the Ovarian Cancer Action Research Centre. 'But most women are not diagnosed early enough.' 

It was only by chance that Sue was in hospital. After she had seen her GP, complaining of agonising stomach pains, a student doctor asked if she could examine her as part of her training - and felt a large mass in her stomach. 

'She told me I should go straight to hospital,' says Sue. 'My husband Stefan drove me the four miles and every bump of the car had me screaming in pain. 

'At the hospital, they stabilised my pain with morphine and booked me in for a CT scan. At one point, the radiographer doing the ultrasound said he thought it could be an ovarian cyst - a harmless growth.'

Pain and fever increased until I was hallucinating 

But for the next few days, while she waited for the CT scan, the pain and fever increased until Sue was hallucinating. As the operating theatre was prepared for emergency surgery, a consultant gave Sue a stark message. 

'She said she had no alternative but to operate immediately instead of waiting for the CT scan,' Sue says. 

'The mass was inflamed and in imminent danger of bursting. If it did, peritonitis and septicaemia would set in and I'd suffer a painful death in the next 48 hours.

'There was also a high risk that the mass could burst during surgery and I might not come round from the anaesthetic. I had to face the fact I could be dead in a few hours.' 

There wasn't even time for Stefan, who was at home looking after their children, to get to hospital to say goodbye. 

'I spoke to him on the phone and, with tears rolling down my face, asked him to look after our children, Kelsey, now eight, and Heather, now six. 

'I couldn't bear to talk to the children. I was terrified they would hear the fear in my voice and that would be the last memory they would have of their mother. The surgeon asked if I wanted more children and for permission to carry out a hysterectomy if necessary. I gave it. I just wanted to live.'

 

That night, in a four-hour operation, surgeons removed a mass attached to Sue's right ovary. Roughly the size and shape of a large rugby ball, it had been pushing on her internal organs, causing a wide array of symptoms. 

The mass had its own blood supply and at some point in the previous few days had suddenly twisted and was cutting off the supply. This had made the mass infected and inflamed. 

As well as removing the mass, the surgeon carried out a radical hysterectomy, removing Sue's womb, ovaries, fallopian tubes, cervix and omentum - a thin tissue lining part of the abdomen. 

The mass had pushed into all these areas and it was almost impossible to separate it from the organs. As Sue later found out, it was also a precaution in case it turned out to be malignant. 

'After the operation, I was in intensive care for two days and discharged after five,' says Sue. 

'I was told there was a possibility that the mass was cancerous. On the other hand, it could be a benign cyst. There was no cancer in my family, so it was easy for me to remain positive.' 

Two weeks later, while Sue and Stefan, 38, were waiting to get the results of the pathology reports, she saw the ovarian cancer nurse going into the doctor's office. 

'I had seen her on the ward dealing with another patient who had ovarian cancer and knew immediately what her presence meant. My heart hit my boots,' says Sue.

'The consultant said the tumour had probably been there as long as my symptoms but, as with all ovarian cancer, it was aggressive and had grown rapidly over the previous few months. 

'Amazingly, considering its size, it had not spread into any of my organs, so was still classed as a grade one tumour. 

'I had been lucky. She didn't talk about my prognosis, but said I would respond well to chemotherapy and promised to do everything she could.' 

Despite the consoling words, Sue was devastated. 

'As she spoke to us, Stefan and I cried a little, but two days later, I broke down at home and sobbed. I knew I was in grave danger of not living to see my children grow up.' 

Sadly, Sue is right to be so worried. 'When you compare the survival rates of ovarian cancer with that of breast or cervical cancer, it has a very poor record,' says Professor Hani Gabra. 

'This is directly related to the lack of an early diagnosis. If you pick up ovarian cancer early on, it is very treatable. But it is an aggressive disease and we estimate there is only a window of 12 months from first symptoms to the point at which it spreads into other organs.' 

This fatal lack of early diagnosis is due to a combination of factors. Ovarian cancer has failed to attract the same interest and money for research as breast cancer - one reason suggested is that there are so few survivors to become lobbyists and ambassadors. 

Another factor is that it's relatively rare and a GP will see only one case every four years. 

To compound this difficulty, unlike breast cancer, where you may feel a lump, or cervical cancer, which can be picked up through a smear result, the key symptoms for ovarian cancer, particularly in the early stages, can be mistaken for less serious complaints. 

Symptoms include stomach bloating, feeling full before you finish your meal and pelvic pain - which are all too easy to attribute to something else. 

Other signs include bladder or bowel weakness, exhaustion and pain elsewhere in the stomach. 

'The key - and we can't emphasis this enough - is that these various symptoms don't disappear after a few weeks,' says Professor Gabra. 

'This is when warning bells should ring and a GP should consider further investigation. This could be a pelvic examination, blood test or referral for an ultrasound scan. 

'Instead, many women with ovarian cancer report being told by their GP that they had irritable bowel symptoms, women's troubles or were simply tired because of their busy lifestyle. This is a situation we are desperate to try to change.'

It was pure chance, a student doctor asked to examine me 

Sue is an example of such misdiagnosis. By her own admission, she is seriously overweight (5ft 4in and 20 stone) and a busy working mother. When she first complained of a swollen stomach and extreme tiredness in early 2007, she accepted her GP's diagnosis that her symptoms were due to her weight and lifestyle. 

'I did cut back on portion sizes, sweets and puddings. But my stomach just seemed to get bigger,' she says. 

Throughout that year, as Sue's symptoms worsened to include incontinence, diarrhoea, bloating and stomach pain, her condition continued to go undiagnosed. 

When, at the end of 2007, she began to suffer from regular high temperatures, she was sent away with antibiotics. 

Incredibly, during the whole of that year she didn't once have a simple stomach examination which may have revealed the growing mass, nor did she have a blood test which could have picked up signs something was amiss with her immune system. 

'Adding up everything, you would ask how on earth did my GP fail to spot that I had cancer?' says Sue. 

'But these symptoms didn't all come at once, but built up over time. So every time I went to the GP, his diagnosis seemed reasonable.

 

Yes, I was overweight, I did have a busy job as a student liaison officer and maybe my bladder was weakened by two Caesareans. 

'The last time I saw my GP, four days before I was admitted to hospital, he told me I had to accept I was, in his words: "No longer the newest model in the showroom." 

'He diagnosed sinusitis because I had a constant cold and gastritis brought on by the painkillers I was taking for stomach cramps and the antibiotics I had been on for my high temperatures. 

'But I can see how he failed to spot cancer, because even I did not think it was anything that bad.' 

Last October, this lack of awareness and, indeed, the slow progress being made in ovarian cancer outcomes led to the Government teaming up with the charity Ovarian Cancer Action in a scheme to educate the public about the main symptoms. 

In the case of ovarian cancer, a quick blood test or pelvic examination could save a woman's life. 

All this has come too late, however, for thousands of women such as Sue, who is in remission following four-and-a-half months of chemotherapy. 

So far, things are looking positive; amazingly, given the size of the tumour, the cancerous cells had not spread into other organs. But she is under no illusions. 

'I am hopeful, but realistic about my chances of long-term survival,' she says. 

'I certainly don't assume I am going to be around for years to come. Time is precious, particularly time spent with my children. I make sure that we are together as a family as much as possible. 

'I don't blame my GP. What is criminal is the lack of funding and raising of awareness. 

'Thankfully, things are starting to change and I will do anything I can to support that change. We simply can't go on losing lives in this needless way.' 

* For more information, go to www.ovarian.org.uk or www.targetovarian.org.uk and  www.eveappeal.org.uk

There is a webchat about ovarian cancer with BBC's Street Doctor Dr Ayan Panja at 2.30pm on Friday 27th February. You can join in and also submit questions early at http://webchats.tv/chat/ovarian_cancer 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

