TITLE	A large glass of wine a day raises cancer risk by a quarter, women are warned

 By Daniel Martin Last updated at 10:08 PM on 24th February 2009

 

Women who drink a large glass of wine a day are increasing their risk of breast cancer by a quarter, a study warned last night. 

Their chance of developing liver or rectal cancer increases by the same amount, the survey of more than a million middle-aged women found. 

If a woman who drinks three units of alcohol a day also smokes she suffers a similar rise in her risk for oral and throat cancers. 

And her likelihood of developing any cancer goes up by an eighth, according to the Oxford University research. 

It calls into question the Government&#8217;s safe drinking limit of &#8216;two to three&#8217; units a day for women. 

There are around three units of alcohol in a large glass of wine. One unit is equivalent to half a pint of beer or a single measure of spirits. 

The research found that the average woman drank a unit a day and had just under a 12 per cent chance of developing one of the five cancers up to the age of 75. 

Each extra unit she drank a day gave her 13 per cent more risk. Drinking three units a day, equal to a large glass of wine, increased her overall risk to nearly 15 per cent - 25 per cent higher than that of a moderate drinker. 

It made no difference what type of alcohol was consumed, whether beer, wine or spirit.

 Study leader Dr Naomi Allen, of Oxford University&#8217;s cancer epidemiology unit, said: &#8216;These findings suggest that even relatively low levels of drinking - about one or two alcoholic drinks every day - increase a woman&#8217;s risk of developing cancer of the breast, liver and rectum; and in smokers, cancers of the mouth and throat.&#8217;

The increase in risk was found to vary by cancer. Dr Allen said one extra unit put up the risk of breast cancer by 12 per cent, rectal cancer by 10 per cent, liver cancer by 24 per cent, mouth and throat cancers in smokers by 25 per cent, and the risk for all cancers by 6 per cent. 

She said it had not been possible to estimate the risk for a teetotaller, because the data did not show whether a woman had never drunk or had stopped for a time. 

The findings suggest Britain faces a spike in such cancers in the future, as figures show that women now drink around 50 per cent more alcohol than they did in 1998. 

Dr Allen predicted that by far the majority of the extra cases will be breast cancer. 

It is estimated that about 5,000 cases of breast cancer, around 11 per cent of the total diagnosed each year, can be put down to consumption of alcohol. 

Cancer Research UK funded the study published in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 

Spokesman Sara Hiom said: &#8216;We know that too much alcohol increases the risk of a number of cancers. This latest study shows that even relatively low levels of drinking increase a woman&#8217;s risk. 

'Cancer Research UK recommends that the more you cut down on alcohol, the more you reduce your cancer risk.&#8217; 

Professor Ian Gilmore, president of the Royal College of Physicians, said: &#8216;This study will be deeply disturbing to many women who drink regularly. 

&#8216;It has to be put in the context that alcohol consumption is only one factor in most common cancers, but the important message is that cutting down from any level of drinking reduces that cancer risk.&#8217; 

A Department of Health spokesman said: &#8216;We keep our guidance on sensible drinking under review. We currently advise on a lower risk drinking limit as drinking above this level could be harmful. 

&#8216;There is no completely safe level of drinking but this lower level reflects known health risks including breast cancer, which is partly why there is a lower drinking limit for women. &#8216;We look forward to examining this research in more detail.&#8217;

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

