TITLE	More than a third of cancer could be prevented by healthy lifestyle, say experts

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 12:17 PM on 26th February 2009

Cutting down on red meat and alcohol intake while eating more fruit and vegetables could prevent thousands of cancers each year, according to a new report.

A major study from the World Cancer Research Fund (WCRF) found that 39 per cent of 12 major cancers could be avoided by adopting a healthy lifestyle.

This included almost half of bowel cancer (43 per cent) and breast cancer (42 per cent) cases.

Increasing the amount of fresh veg and fruit in the diet and cutting down on alcohol could prevent 67 per cent of cases of mouth, pharynx and larynx cancer each year, the report said.

This is equivalent to more than 3,300 cases each year in the UK.

For cancer of the oesophagus, 75 per cent of cases (around 5,800 cases a year) could be prevented with increased intake of fruit and veg, less alcohol and maintaining a healthy weight.

Almost half (45 per cent) of cases of stomach cancer (around 3,500 cases a year) could be cut by less salt and more fruit and veg.

Meanwhile, 41 per cent of cases of pancreatic cancer (3,100 cases a year) could be prevented if people kept their weight in check and ate more foods containing folate, such as green vegetables, brown rice and fortified breakfast cereals.

 

Bowel cancer cases could be cut by 43 per cent (around 15,700 cases a year) if people ate more fibre, cut down on red and processed meats and alcohol and increased their exercise levels while keeping their weight within a healthy range.

Almost one in five (19 per cent) kidney cancer cases could be prevented by keeping weight in check (around 1,400 new cases a year) while 42 per cent of breast cancer cases (around 19,100 cases a year) could be prevented by cutting down on alcohol, increasing exercise and keeping weight in check.

The report - Policy and Action for Cancer Prevention - was written by 23 leading experts from around the world.

The WCRF recommends that people wishing to help prevent cancer should keep themselves as lean as possible without becoming underweight, and eat five portions of fruit and veg each day.

They should also be physically active for at least 30 minutes every day, avoid sugary drinks and cut down on processed foods high in added sugar or fat, or low in fibre.

People should also limit red meats (such as beef, pork and lamb) and avoid processed meats.

Suggested upper limits are 500g a week of cooked weight red meat or an uncooked weight of roughly 700-750g.

Processed meats include bacon and hams and some sausages and burgers.

Men should also drink no more than two units of alcohol a day while women should have no more than one.

Salt should be limited and people should not use vitamin supplements to try to protect themselves against cancer.

The report also calls on world governments, media, industry, individuals and workplaces to encourage exercise and cut down on unhealthy foods.

It said governments should use legislation and pricing to discourage people from eating unhealthy food while encouraging healthy eating.

Professor Sir Michael Marmot, chair of the WCRF panel, said: 'This report shows that by making relatively straightforward changes, we could significantly reduce the number of cancer cases around the world.

'When people think of policy reports, they often think they are only relevant to governments.

'But while governments are important in this, the evidence shows that when it comes to cancer prevention, all groups in society have a role to play.

'This report is relevant to everyone from heads of government to the people who do the weekly food shopping for their family.'

Professor Martin Wiseman, project director of the report, said: 'Making estimates on the proportion of cancer cases that are preventable is complex and challenging.

'The figures in this report have been agreed by the most eminent of scientists and they are as accurate as they can be with the available data.

'On a global level every year, there are millions of cancer cases that could have been prevented and this is why we need to act now before the situation gets even worse.

'We are expecting a substantial increase in cancer rates with the ageing population, obesity rates soaring, and with people becoming less active and increasingly consuming highly processed and energy-dense foods and drinks.

'The good news is that this is not inevitable and we still have the chance to avert a crisis before it is too late.'

Professor Mike Richards, the Government's cancer tsar, said: 'The evidence linking diet, physical activity, obesity and cancer has become stronger over the last decade and this report can play a part in people adopting healthier lifestyles.

'I welcome this report, which has been produced by leading scientists in the field.

'After not smoking, it is clear that diet, physical activity and weight are the most important things people can do to reduce their cancer risk.'

Dr Francesco Branca, head of nutrition at the World Health Organisation, said: 'This report represents an important step forward in our understanding of how policies and actions can help prevent cancer and other chronic diseases.

'The report is comprehensive and its conclusions have been made by a panel of global experts.

'The recommendations will inspire policy-makers and decision-takers to act in a way that will play an important role in the fight against cancer.'

Richard Davidson, Cancer Research UK's director of policy and public affairs, said: 'Around 13,000 cancer cases in the UK are linked to being overweight or obese.

'And even more are linked to poor diets, drinking too much alcohol and not doing enough exercise. After smoking, these are some of the biggest preventable causes of cancer.

'Doing nothing could be disastrous.

'We've been working hard to raise awareness of this link for many years and we welcome this report in highlighting the need for a truly integrated approach to cancer prevention.

'There is no magic bullet, no one single fix to the problem. If we are to tackle the situation, we need individuals, business and government to work together to encourage healthy lifestyles by promoting things like cycle lanes and food labelling.'

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

