TITLE	The foods that could prevent cancer

by LYNDEL COSTAIN, Daily Mail

Eating our five or more servings of fruit and vegetables a day may reduce cancer risk by 20 per cent, while three daily servings of wholegrains could cut risk by up to 30 per cent.

And some foods contain phytochemicals (natural compounds in plants that benefit health), which make them stand out from the crowd.

Follow our guide to foods that might help prevent cancer.

Click on the link at the bottom of the page for foods that could trigger the disease.

SINIGRIN

Found in Brussels sprouts. You can blame sinigrin for sprouts' distinctive smell and taste. But it does have a good side. Studies show it exerts cancerfighting effects by triggering precancerous cells to essentially commit suicide (apoptosis).

This effect is so powerful that the occasional meal of sprouts could destroy pre-cancerous cells in the colon.

ISOFLAVONES

Found in soya milk, tofu and other soybased foods. Prostate tests on East Asian men, who traditionally eat more soya foods and have a lower risk of prostate cancer, showed they had much higher levels of isoflavones.

CAROTENOIDS (alpha and beta carotene).

Found in mango, papaya, red peppers, carrots, sweet potatoes, butternut squash and oranges. A 15-year study of 15,000 women found a link between high intakes of foods rich in the carotenoids and reduced risk of cervical cancer.

Lower blood levels of these carotenoids have also been found in women with cervical cancer.

LYCOPENE

Found mainly in tomatoes (small amounts in pink grapefruit and watermelon) lycopene is a potent antioxidant, mopping up

Tomatoes have been proven to prevent prostate cancer

potentially celldamaging molecules called free radicals.

A study of 47,000 American men showed that eating tomato products ten or more times a week reduced prostate cancer risk by a third.

LIGNANS

In wholewheat, linseeds, rye, sesame seeds, pumpkin seeds. Studies consistently link low blood levels of lignans and their breakdown products with an increased risk of breast cancer, suggesting that lignans offer protection.

CURCUMIN

Found in turmeric, the yellow part of curry spice mixes. Colon (large bowel) cancer is much less common in India than in the UK and the high intake of curcumin is thought to help explain this. Curcumin blocks colon cancer in rats, and studies suggest it suppresses development of colon cancer cells in humans.

Extensive research into curcumin is being carried out in Leicester after researchers noticed that while 20 per cent of the city's population is Asian, only two out of 500 colon-cancer patients were from that ethnic background. Turmeric also has strong anti-inflammatory properties.

CONJUGATED LINOLEIC ACID (CLA)

Found in milk, dairy foods and meat. A study in the journal Nutrition And Cancer, compared the dietary intake and blood levels of CLA in a group of women with breast cancer, to a group of similar women without the disease.

This control research found that a low risk of breast cancer was associated with higher blood levels and intakes of CLA.

This doesn't prove that it reduces breastcancer risk. But when viewed alongside another a study that linked lower breastcancer risk with higher lifelong milk intakes, it seems it may play a role.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

