TITLE	How safe are your favourite foods?

by LYNDEL COSTAIN, Daily Mail

Life without bread, crisps, chips, biscuits and breakfast cereals?

This could well become a reality for those worried enough about getting cancer to cut them out of their diet altogether.

It follows last week's confirmation by the Food Standards Agency that recent shock findings by Swedish scientists revealed that these everyday foods contain worryingly high amounts of acrylamide, a probable cancer-causing agent.

The FSA responded by testing everyday foods found in British supermarkets - such as crisps, Ryvita, Pringles and Rice Krispies - and found similarly high levels.

While claiming that we don't need to radically change our eating habits, the FSA said we should eat a balanced diet with plenty of fruit and vegetables.

Meanwhile, it is planning meetings with European experts and the World Health Organisation to establish more about how acrylamide is formed in food, and whether eating foods containing it really does have the potential to affect our health.

This is just one of many scares about the safety of our food. It also highlights the role that diet plays in the development of cancer, a disease that will affect one in three of us in our lifetime.

And according to the World Cancer Research Fund, 30 to 40 per cent of cancers are directly related to the foods we eat, our weight and activity levels. The good news is that many foods also help to protect us against cancer.

Here we look at foods and ingredients that you should either limit or make a regular feature on your cancer-combating shopping list.

FOODS THAT MAY CAUSE CANCER. . .

ACRYLAMIDE

Found in baked, fried and grilled foods such as crisps, chips, bread, biscuits, crackers, and breakfast cereals. Prolonged high intakes of acrylamide could cause nerve damage, and, according to animal studies, affect male fertility and trigger cancer.

The Swedish study was the first to suggest that it is formed when carbohydrate-rich foods such as potatoes, rice and cereals are fried or baked (acrylamide was not formed when the foods were boiled).

In fact, researchers found that a bag of crisps may contain up to 500 times more acrylamide than the World Health Organisation allows as a maximum safety limit in drinking water. Some fries from fast-food chains were said to contain up to 100 times more.

It is impossible to avoid acrylamide because it's found in so many everyday foods - and not just fatty crisps and fries. Healthy foods that we feed to the whole family such as Ryvita, rice cakes, branflakes, Special K and wholemeal bread, are all tarred with the acrylamide brush.

Risk factor: Fortunately, our estimated daily intake is 1,000 times lower than the amounts found to cause nerve damage and affect fertility in rats.

But the FSA is clear that since acrylamide is a potential cancercausing agent, it shouldn't be in our food, and certainly not at these levels. Meanwhile, their advice is to limit fried and fatty foods and eat plenty of fruit and vegetables, as these steps are known to help protect our health and reduce cancer risk.

HETEROCYCLIC AMINES

People who eat large amounts of red meat (pork, beef and lamb), barbecued and processed meat, such as sausages, bacon and hamburgers are at a higher risk of bowel cancer, according to a report in the British Medical Journal.

A potential culprit is heterocyclic amines which are formed on the surface of meat when it's grilled, roasted, fried or barbecued - especially when burned or charred.

Risk factor: Although animal studies suggest that high intakes of heterocyclic amines can promote cancer, there is no direct evidence in humans. But it makes sense to minimise any risk.

In 1998, the Department of Health advised that we should not exceed an average of 140g (5oz) of red and processed meat a day.

SALT

A high salt diet has been linked to an increased risk of stomach cancer. It is thought the salt, in foods like bacon, can damage and inflame the soft lining.

Fortunately, this type of cancer has decreased since refrigeration replaced more traditional preserving methods, such as pickling and salting.

Improved treatment of Helicobacter pylori infection, a condition that inflames the stomach lining, has also helped. About three quarters of the salt we eat comes from processed foods, especially smoked, canned, pickled items, sauces, fast-food and ready meals.

Risk factor: The Department of Health advises cutting back to no more than 6g a day - which is about half of what we currently eat - to reduce the risk of high blood pressure and stroke.

The World Cancer Research Fund says this may also have an effect on stomach cancer risk.

CALCIUM IN DAIRY FOODS

A study from Harvard School of Public Health of 21,000 men confirmed previous links between high intakes of dairy foods and an increased risk of prostate cancer. In the study this meant more than

2.5 daily servings of dairy foods, a serving being a 250ml glass of milk or 40g (1.5oz) of cheese.

The authors suggest that a high calcium intake from dairy products may lower blood levels of D3, a hormone thought to protect against prostate cancer.

Risk factor: This study does not show cause and effect, and other research has shown no link. Meanwhile, to help ensure an adequate calcium intake, healthy eating advice is to include a moderate amount of dairy foods in our balanced diet.

HEAT

A number of studies link very hot drinks such as tea or coffee with increased risk

Could coffe cause cancer?

of cancer of the oesophagus.

Risk factor: The heat is thought to inflame and scar the lining of the oesophagus making it more vulnerable to cancer cell development.

ALCOHOL

A consistently high alcohol intake is linked to increased risk of cancer of the mouth, oesophagus, bowel, liver and breast.

In fact, an American study which followed the lifestyles of more than 200,000 women for 14 years found that for postmenopausal women, less than a drink a day was related to a 30 per cent increase in death from breast cancer, compared to nondrinkers.

Risk factor: UK sensible daily drinking limits are set at 3 to 4 units for men and 2 to 3 units for women (a unit is a pint of beer, small glass of wine or pub measure of spirits), and above these limits there is a continuing risk to health.

FAT

In fatty meats, full-fat dairy foods, cakes, snack and fast-foods, biscuits and pastries.

Evidence directly linking fat to cancer risk is inconclusive, but highfat diets are more clearly linked to obesity, which may be responsible for 5 per cent of all cancers.

Risk factor: Obese women are particularly prone to cancer of the uterus, cervix, ovary, gall-bladder and breast, while overweight men have an increased risk of colorectal and prostate cancers.

Severely obese people may also be at increased risk of kidney, pancreatic and stomach cancer.

AFLATOXINS

Found on peanuts and grains, aflatoxins are a type of fungus that increases the risk of liver cancer. They are produced by moulds on foods such as nuts, cereals, and spices, especially in tropical countries.

Risk factor: The EU has set safety limits for aflatoxin content of imported foods, but since it is not visible, contaminated produce occasionally slips through the net.

However, the FSA considers that consumption of a very small amount of aflatoxin on a single occasion is unlikely to cause ill effects.

Click below to discover the foods that could help prevent cancer.

More information: www.wcrf-uk.org, www.cancerhelp.org.uk, www.foodstandards.gov.uk. The Super Nutrients Handbook by Lyndel Costain. Dorling Kindersley, 2001 (&pound;5.99).

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

