TITLE	Good news for tea lovers: Drinking two cups a day can 'ward off ovarian cancer'

 By Jenny Hope Last updated at 12:21 AM on 28th February 2009

Drinking tea can cut the risk of ovarian cancer by up to a third, researchers have said. 

A study found women drinking at least two cups a day of black tea had a 30 per cent drop in risk. 

It is thought antioxidant compounds found in tea &#8211; catechins and theanins &#8211; contribute to improved blood vessel function.

The study was carried out in the U.S. with 414 women, half of whom had been diagnosed with ovarian cancer.

The findings were released in the International Journal of Gynaecological Cancer before the start of ovarian cancer month in March. 

This aims to raise awareness of the disease, of which there are more than 6,600 new cases in the UK each year. 

About 4,400 women die each year from the illness, which claims the lives of more than 85 per cent of patients when found at a late stage. But detection in the early stages means 95 per cent of sufferers will survive.

Dr Catherine Hood, from the industry-backed Tea Advisory Panel, said an earlier Swedish study involving over 61,000 women made similar findings. 

It showed those who drank two or more cups of tea daily had a 46 per cent lower risk of the disease compared with those who never or seldom drank tea. 

 

Alex Ford, chief executive of The Eve Appeal, which supports patients with gynaecological cancers, said women should be aware of the signs of ovarian cancer, especially those over 50.

She said: &#8216;Traditionally, early diagnosis was difficult as experts didn&#8217;t agree on the symptoms and they are easily mistaken for other, much more common and less serious conditions. 

&#8216;But there&#8217;s been more research, and scientists and doctors have agreed on what advice to give women.&#8217; 

It has been previously found that the health benefits of tea are not affected by adding milk. 

Almost 80 per cent of Britons are tea drinkers, getting through an estimated 165million cups every day. 

&#8226; The Eve Appeal is encouraging everyone to throw a tea party to raise funds. Details from www.eveappeal.org.uk 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

