TITLE	JANE CLARKE: Want to ward off cancer? Eat more yoghurt

Last updated at 9:27 PM on 2nd March 2009

Every Tuesday, Britain's leading nutritionist explains how to eat your way to health. This week Jane explains how dairy products can help with the war on cancer...

We're always being told how important it is to eat at least five portions of fruit and vegetables every day to reduce our risk of cancer. But calcium might offer even better protection; new American research shows it can dramatically cut the risk of bowel, prostate and breast cancer. 

While we all know calcium is good for our teeth and bones, these new findings are a revelation.

The study, by the National Cancer Institute in America, found men who consumed the highest amount of calcium per day (an average 1,530mg) had a 16 per cent lower risk of developing cancers of the bowel and prostate than those who consumed the lowest amounts (average 526mg).

 

Meanwhile, women who consumed around 1,881mg of calcium a day had a 23per cent lower risk of breast and bowel cancer than those who consumed 494mg. Both men and women should sit up and take note. 

Calcium works by reducing abnormal cell activity as well as stimulating normal cell growth. The National Cancer Institute has now recommended adults aged 50 or older consume 1,200mg of calcium a day. The UK Food Standards Agency recommends only 700mg a day for adults  -  something I think must now be reviewed in light of these findings. 

As with any vitamin or mineral, it's better to get it from your diet, rather than taking a supplement. What this new finding suggests is that we should be eating more calcium-rich food. 

Good sources include milk, cheese and other dairy foods, green leafy vegetables such as broccoli, cabbage (particularly dark green varieties) and curly kale, tofu, soya beans, fortified soya milk (and other drinks, such as orange juice with added calcium), nuts, bread, and anything made with fortified flour, such as bread and some breakfast cereals. 

The added benefit in dairy foods is that you find other nutrients with potentially anticarcinogenic properties, such as vitamin D and conjugated linoleic acid, an omega-6 fatty acid thought to protect against colorectal and breast cancer. 

Although dairy products are the best source of calcium, many people avoid them because of the high saturated fat content and calorie count. Indeed, if we tucked into plates of cheese and poured cream on apple pies with buttery pastry all the time, our levels of bad cholesterol would rise, our arteries would be clogged up with plaque and we'd have heart disease. Not to mention putting on weight! 

This is where low-fat dairy products have an important role, containing just as much, and in some cases more, calcium as the full-fat versions. I'm generally not a fan of low-fat products, as I think they taste worse and can be filled with lots of sugar to compensate for the fat taken out. Also, 'low fat' doesn't mean you won't put on weight  -  eat too much and you'll still be in trouble. 

   More... Ask the doctor: My wife's not that big...so why is she diabetic? 

The answer is tasty low-fat dairy; natural low-fat yoghurt or fromage frais, low-fat cheese (Gouda, Edam and cottage cheese) and of course semi or skimmed milk (it may surprise you to learn the latter has slightly more calcium). 

If you want to hit the levels this new study suggests, as a guide you can glean around 1,200mg of calcium from three glasses (200ml) of skimmed milk, a small pot (150g) of low-fat natural yoghurt and 40g of hard cheese (you could swap one of the glasses of milk for a second yoghurt or some cottage cheese). 

The alternative is to take a supplement, but discuss this with your doctor, and bear in mind that a pill gives you only one mineral; you miss out on all the other cancer preventing nutrients dairy foods provide, and a pill doesn't taste half as nice!

OILY FISH CAN SOOTHE THE PAIN OF PSORIASIS 

I suffer terribly from psoriasis. Are there any foods or spices that might aggravate the condition or, alternatively, any that might help, even a little? Mary Evans, Doncaster 

Jane says... Psoriasis is a skin condition that leads to very itchy, red, flaky skin lesions. Changing your diet can yield good results, so I think it's well worth a try. 

The first, most successful diet change is boosting your intake of something called long-chain omega-3 fatty acids, in particular one called Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA). We call them essential fatty acids because we can only get them from our diet: our bodies can't manufacture them so it's essential we eat them. 

Although you can get EPA in supplement form, it's far better to get the real thing from food, as it's better absorbed by the body.

Boost your intake by eating foods containing these omega-3 fatty acids  -  that means oily fish such as salmon, fresh tuna, sardines, mackerel (2-4 portions a week is the ideal, the smaller amount being considered best for girls and women of childbearing age). 

While you can get some omega 3s from walnuts, seeds, hemp or rapeseed oil, they don't provide the beneficial type that helps psoriasis, so you should see them as a useful extra rather than your main omega 3 source. If fish isn't your thing, a supplement is better than nothing  -  take 500mg of a supplement such as Max-EPA fish oil. With other brands, the dose you are looking for is 500mg EPA/DHA. 

Interestingly, some people with psoriasis seem to react badly to gluten, in a similar way to people with coeliac disease  -  only this time it causes a skin, rather than a gut, reaction.

See coeliac.co.uk for information on how to avoid gluten containing foods. For extra help, get yourself referred to a dietician who can help you work through the diet.

 

GRILLED MACKEREL

2 whole mackerel, cleaned; 1 red chilli, deseeded and finely chopped; grated zest and juice of 1 lime; 1tbsp olive or hemp oil; 20g fresh coriander, finely chopped (including stems);1 clove garlic, crushed 

Make four diagonal slashes across the mackerel on each side, cutting down to the bone. Place in a shallow dish. 

Make the rub by mixing the chilli, lime zest and juice, oil, coriander and garlic. Place one-third of the rub in the cavity of each fish and rub the remainder over the skin. Cover, place in the fridge and marinate for 30 to 60 minutes. 

When ready to cook, preheat the grill to high. Place mackerel on a grill rack, drizzling over any remaining juice from the rub, and cook for 6-7 minutes on each side, until skin is crispy and the flesh just cooked. 

 

Serves 2 

 

50g/2oz unsalted butter, chopped; 50g/2oz plain flour; 2tbsp soft brown sugar; 2tbsp chopped walnuts; 4 rhubarb sticks, cut into 2in pieces; juice of half an orange; 1dsp caster sugar; 1 vanilla pod, split 

Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4. For the topping, rub the butter and flour together with your fingers until the mixture has the consistency of coarse breadcrumbs.

Stir in the sugar and walnuts, then spread on a baking sheet. Bake in the oven for five minutes, or until golden-brown and crunchy. Set aside. 

Place the rhubarb, orange juice, sugar and vanilla pod into a saucepan and simmer for five minutes, or until the rhubarb is just tender. Remove the vanilla pod. To serve, spoon the poached rhubarb into bowls and sprinkle the crumble mixture on top.

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

