TITLE	The Jade Goody circus is like the ghoulish spectacle of public hanging, says cancer suffering BBC journalist James Landale

 By James Landale Last updated at 6:38 PM on 4th March 2009

It began, as it does for so many others, with a lump. A small, seemingly innocuous noggin of flesh that grew in the side of my neck. 

I noticed it first last October, at the end of a particularly gruelling political party conference season which I had been covering for the BBC. 

A stress lump, I thought carelessly. An enlarged gland telling me I had worked too hard, drunk too much and slept too little. 

But the little thing had staying power, so I went to my GP. There followed a month of tests and consultations that ended with an ear, nose and throat specialist carving open my neck to remove a sample for the microscope slide. 

The results confirmed that the offending piece of gristle was teeming with more cancerous cells than one would normally want. 

I had, the doctors informed me, something called diffuse large B-cell non-Hodgkins lymphoma.

To you and me, this is a cancer of the lymph system, the network of tubes and glands at the heart of the body's immune system. 

I began chemotherapy the following week, and am still supping with the life-preserving poison as I write. 

So, like Jade Goody, I have cancer; and, like Jade, I have had chemo. 

Yet there the similarities end. While Jade has been told that her cancer is terminal, I have not. 

My reassuring and very eminent oncologist at Southampton Hospital, Dr Ben Mead, says that I have 'good prognostic features': the cancerous cells have not spread beyond my neck, my bone marrow and other scans were normal, my relative youth  -  I am 40  -  and otherwise good health will stand me in good stead. 

   More... Jack Tweed emerges after spending the night at dying wife Jade's bedside 'I tell Jade enough is enough, but it's her life,' admits Max Clifford 

Most of the 9,500 people diagnosed with non-Hodgkins lymphoma each year  -  such as the former Liberal Democrat leader Sir Menzies Campbell in 2002  -  survive a long time, and many are cured. 

As such, Dr Mead treats me with benign disdain, as if I am the least of his problems.

 He tells me about other patients in far worse shape, and compares my modest lump to their tumours  -  the market standard size of which appears to be a grapefruit. 

I am, therefore, much blessed compared to Jade. I cannot begin to imagine what it is like for her now. Her cervical cancer has spread across her body; her pain is being treated with morphine and she is in and out of hospice and hospital. 

So I will not judge Jade herself. I cannot in all decency do so. She is facing death: I have merely glimpsed it across a crowded room. While she is counting the days, I have simply felt a brief shiver of mortality. 

I can no more criticise Jade for her choices than any other healthy person. 

If she chooses to end her life exploiting her celebrity to provide for her two young boys' future and raise awareness of cancer, then so be it. Few can disagree with that. 

But those who follow the Jade Goody coverage with such seemingly prurient interest should, I believe, examine their motives. 

Yes, this is a powerful, compelling story of human tragedy  -  but how much are people drawn in also by the prospect of witnessing death? 

How much are people succumbing to exactly the same appetites as those who once took their picnics to attend a public hanging? 

Perhaps they are not quite modern-day tricoteuses sitting with their knitting before the guillotine, or day-trippers to the Coliseum watching the lions at work. Cancer rarely provides such a quick, violent death. 

But perhaps some of those people obsessively following the Jade story  -  photo by photo, detail by detail  -  are betraying the same instincts as those who slow down on the motorway to stare at some poor wretch hanging out of their windscreen? 

Let's look at the latest photographs of Jade, they think, which have been splashed across the front pages of the redtop tabloids every morning for weeks. 

Is she looking better or worse than yesterday? Has she lost any more weight? Will she ever get out of the wheelchair? How long has she got? And so on and so on. 

What my own experience with cancer has given me is an insight into the way sufferers, loved ones, acquaintances  -  and the public  -  react to the disease. And it is my fear that through the tragic story of Jade Goody, we are getting only one side of the truth about cancer. 

The reality  -  for the quarter of a million of us who are diagnosed every year  -  is more nuanced, more balanced. 

Cancer is ghastly, but not everything associated with the disease is bad. There can, believe it or not, be positive experiences. 

The time away from work has given me more time with my family. I have been overwhelmed by the kindness people have shown  -  the concerned emails from strangers, the woolly hats from friends to cover the baldness, the neighbours turning up unannounced with cottage pie and soup. 

My faith in the essential goodness of human nature has been reaffirmed. But until I was diagnosed, I had not realised how obsessed we, as a nation, are with cancer. 

According to Cancer Research UK: 'Cancer is the number one fear for the British public, topping the list over Alzheimer's, heart attack and terrorism.' 

Study follows study, scare follows scare, and we lap it up. 

Yet Cancer Research UK also notes that over the past decade the overall cancer death rate has fallen by ten per cent. Specifically, the average ten-year cancer survival rate has doubled over the past three decades. 

And as for cervical cancer, women are now half as likely to get the disease as they were in 1988 when NHS screening was introduced. At that time, around 4,800 women were diagnosed with cervical cancer each year; now, the figure is around 2,700. 

The death rate has more than halved, too, with cervical cancer no longer one of the top 20 causes of cancer death. Not the sort of statistics that have been getting much air time recently. 

So much for the stats. But the personal presentation of cancer can sometimes be just as misleading. 

In my experience, the public face of the victim is not always an honest reflection of the private experience. 

The cancer sufferer faces a dilemma. One is encouraged to be optimistic  -  to adopt a positive mental attitude to aid recovery. 

And it is true: the last thing you want to do is give up, surrender to your bed, and become a professional invalid. 

The trouble with a stiff upper lip, though, is that there always tends to be a pretty wobbly one underneath. 

There are times when the nausea, the fatigue, the stomach cramps and the steroid-induced 'Black Dog' depression become too much, and all one wants to do is hide under the duvet. 

Let us not forget, too, the pins and needles in your hands, the hot flushes, the dry skin and what the advertisers laughably call 'slow digestive transit'  -  which most of us know as constipation. 

On top of all that, of course, there is the temporary loss of hair, and those occasional long nights when irrational fear defeats all sleep. 

All of these side-effects from chemotherapy are routine for thousands of cancer sufferers across the country. 

To claim any different is to deny the truth. Many is the time when one puts on a brave face in public, when, in reality, one feels anything but. 

Jade will have endured all this and more. So do not believe all you read in the press or see on the television about what she has gone through. Until recent days, we have seen only what she and her publicist, Max Clifford, want us to see. 

Forget the romantic tale, the brave faces at the wedding  -  sold to a feel-good magazine  -  the talk of how good it is that more young women are bothering to turn up for their cervical smears. 

The reality is that this is a story about a girl who is suffering grievously and preparing to die  -  and people are fascinated with death. 

That, in truth, is what the Jade Goody story is really about. When people read the words, and look at the pictures, what hooks them is the fact that she is dying and she is allowing us to watch. The celebrity, the soap opera, the media circus is all secondary hogwash. 

I see a little of this death obsession when some well-meaning people cock their head on one side and ask: 'How are you?' For all their undoubted sympathy and concern, some cannot hide a flicker of curiosity in their tone and eyes which suggests that what they are really asking is: 'How are you facing the risk of death?' 

One should not be too surprised at this. Audiences down the ages have always been attracted by death. The fascination of Greek tragedy is not if death will come  -  we know that it will  -  but how and why. So let us at least be honest about such motivations. 

What we are seeing in these final stages of Jade Goody's life is little more than creepy voyeurism. 

We are told that Jade might withdraw from the public gaze in the final days. Perhaps. 

But there is still that interview lined up with Piers Morgan. 

There is still a christening  -  reportedly for her and her children  -  planned for the weekend. And what price a photograph of the final moments, the deathbed itself, the fear of eternity writ large on her face? 

For those who live in the public eye, there are many ways to deal with cancer. Jade has chosen her route. But in recent days, we have also seen some different choices. 

The actress Wendy Richard, who died last week from breast cancer, was honest but private. She told the world in October that her cancer had spread. She married her fourth husband and got on with what remained of her life. 

The former England football manager, Sir Bobby Robson, who is now in his fifth and final battle with cancer, is using his last months to raise cash for a new research centre at Newcastle's Freeman Hospital. Last week, he squeezed £75,000 out of the Football Association. 

He said: 'There have been days when I have been unwell and my disability has been a terrific blow. I have had operations which mean I am partially paralysed  -  but I always try to make sure it doesn't affect me. 

'I don't want people to think of me as poorly. I want people to think of me as the same Bobby as I have always been. 

'Cancer is a horrific disease, but at the same time cancer has shown me the best in people.' 

Yes, that sounds about right. Some have argued that the Jade Goody story illustrates our modern inability to deal with death  -  our distance from it, our desire to hide it away in nursing homes, hospices and distant battle fields. 

Here, in the shape of a 27-year-old woman from Essex, we can experience death  -  but vicariously, from the safety of our armchairs. 

I agree there must be better ways of dealing with death and grief than hiding from it.

 But the public circus and hysteria of a celebrity death is surely not the answer. 

In the coming months, there will be much talk of legacy as people look for meaning in the life and death of a celebrity. 

My own hope is, at the very least, for a more balanced portrayal of the realities of cancer, and perhaps some fresh thinking about how we as a society approach death.

In former times, there was more public ritual and ceremonial  -  the wearing of certain clothes, the black-edged cards, the wakes held in same room as the body, the sharing of stories about the life just gone and how it touched others. 

Death was part of life. 

Now, it seems, it is perilously close to becoming a form of entertainment. 

&#8226; JAMES LANDALE is chief political correspondent for the BBC News Channel. 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

