TITLE	Breast cancer is linked to bad childhood diet, study reveals

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 11:36 AM on 15th March 2009

Diet and the amount of exercise young girls take can determine their risk of breast cancer in later life, a study reveals.

The report, Nutrition in Children and Breast Cancer Childhood, analysed 1,146 girls from birth to age 13 and linked obesity and lack of exercise to an increased risk of breast cancer. 

The findings led to calls for parents to protect their daughters from the disease by ensuring they stay active and slim.

Research was led by Professor Jaak Janssens, president of the European Cancer Prevention Organization, in Hasselt, Belgium. 

Professor Janssens and his team studied medical reports, which show a well-established link between early puberty and breast development and later breast cancer risk. 

His report analysed the girls in his group to see what factors, including nutrition influenced early puberty development. 

The report suggests: 'Further research should focus on nutrition in children and breast cancer risk to prevent the disease.'

It said: 'Childhood obesity, lack of physical activity, high glycemic (processed) carbohydrate consumption,' were among the &#8220;strongest determinants influencing the onset of puberty.'

Professor Florian Strasser, Scientific Chair of the conference for the European Society for Medical Oncology, where the study will be presented next week, told the Sunday Express: 'This could become a big public health issue.

'If this is proved we have even bigger grounds to go into schools and preschools and encourage more sports and healthier eating.'

The report also highlights a link between the disease and exposure to 'gender-bending' chemicals in childhood.

It said: 'Breast cancer seems to originate almost entirely in childhood. The breast is most vulnerable at the very onset of development.'

The report suggests: 'Further research should focus on nutrition in children and breast cancer risk to prevent the disease.'   

It also revealed a history of glandular fever might also have an influence on later risk, citing 'exposure to oestrogens' found in plastic babies&#8217; bottles and plastic toys as another risk factor.  

Prof Strasser, head of palliative cancer medicine at Cantonal Hospital, St Gallen, Switzerland, added: 'We know breast cancer is associated with obesity and a lack of physical activity.

'This shows these factors are related to early puberty which is also a risk factor.'

Dr Leslie Walker, director of information for Cancer Research UK said: 'We are already worried about rising rates of obesity and unhealthy lifestyle in children. This study shows the negative aspects of our affluence in potentially influencing breast cancer risk.

'It highlights the importance of ensuring our children don&#8217;t over eat and get plenty of exercise.'

Another recent report from the U.S. shows girls who are overweight at the age of three risk reaching puberty as early as nine years old. 

The research, published in the journal Paediatrics, also suggests childhood obesity is causing the trend of earlier puberty in girls.

The 'normal' age for a girl to reach puberty has dropped from late teens to early teens in the last century.  

One theory is that puberty is triggered by the hormone leptin, which is produced by fat tissue. 

Helen Crocker, research dietician at University College London, said: 'In our clinics we are seeing girls of seven, eight and nine who are starting their periods and going through puberty. It can be distressing for them.'

About 44,000 people in the UK each year are diagnosed with breast cancer. Celebrities who have battled the disease include singer Kylie Minogue.

Other factors said to influence a woman&#8217;s risk are genetic factors, changes in hormones and whether a woman breastfed. 

The Zurich conference on cancer and nutrition will also examine the link between the disease and hormones fed to beef and the benefits of green tea in reducing risk. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

