TITLE	Denmark compensates women who developed breast cancer after working nights... but Britain denies there's a risk

 By Fiona Macrae and Marcus Oscarsson Last updated at 9:10 PM on 16th March 2009

Dozens of women who developed breast cancer after working night shifts have won compensation for their ordeal. 

Almost 40 air cabin crew, nurses and soldiers received payouts from the Danish government after the World Health Organisation ruled that working at night may have caused the disease. 

Night shifts were rated just one rung below asbestos and smoking in the league table of potential cancer triggers. 

More than 3.5million Britons work nights, which research suggests disrupts production of a hormone that keeps breast tumours in check. 

The risk of prostate cancer may also be increased, according to the International Agency for Research on Cancer, an arm of the WHO. 

The agency's Dr Vincent Cogliano said disruption to the normal cycle of being awake during the day and asleep at night may suppress the production of the hormone melatonin. 

He said: 'Melatonin has some beneficial effects in preventing some steps leading to cancer.' 

Previous studies have shown that breast cancer tumours grow roughly twice as fast as normal when exposed to blood which is low in melatonin. 

The Danish government is the first in the world to classify breast cancer among shift workers as an industrial injury.

   More... Fresh mushrooms 'slashes breast cancer risk' 

So far 37 women have been compensated. Appeals have been lodged in a further 18 cases that were rejected. 

A Danish government spokesman declined to give details of the amounts involved, but women with a family history of breast cancer are excluded. 

Those who will receive compensation include Ulla Mahnkop, who developed cancer in both breasts after spending 30 years working as a flight attendant. She said she would have left her job if she had known the dangers. 

'I wouldn't have been flying for that many years,' she said. 

In Britain, a two-year study into the effects of shift work on health has been commissioned by the Health and Safety Executive. 

However, a spokesman said: 'At the moment, the evidence of a risk is not so compelling that the HSE feels preventive action should be taken in workplaces.' 

The Royal College of Nursing said it was waiting for more information on how to reduce the risk to those who have no option but to work at night. 

Professor Andrew Watterson, an occupational health specialist at Stirling University, said: 'I think we can say there is a big public health problem here. The evidence has been good over a long period of time about cardiovascular disease and night work, gastrointestinal problems and nights. 

'Work indicates there may be a risk of low birth-weight babies and longer pregnancies.' 

But lawyers warned it would be difficult to win a claim in Britain. 

Caroline Klage, a personal injury specialist at Bolt Burdon Kemp solicitors, said a woman would need to show that her employer had failed to protect her health. 

She added: 'The issue would be whether the courts would be prepared to make a finding when the women had consented to working night shifts.' 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

