TITLE	Are fizzy drinks friend or foe?

by NAOMI COLEMAN, femail.co.uk

Cans of fizzy drink are convenient and tasty but they can also be laden with sugars, sweeteners, E numbers and additives which don't do us any good.

So do they deserve the bad press they get or are they a harmless treat?

Here, femail.co.uk has investigated the truth behind fizzy drinks. We examine some of the health risks associated with your favourite drinks and find a verdict.

Can fizzy drinks damage my bones? 

Carbonated drinks have been linked to weaker bones in several studies. There is some evidence to show that teenage girls who drink carbonated drinks are three times more likely to suffer broken bones than those who avoid them.

One theory is that phosphoric acid (an artificial version of phosphorous) used as a preservative in some fizzy drinks competes with calcium to make bones strong. Although phosphorous and calcium are both needed in equal amounts for bone health, too much phosphorous can prevent absorption of calcium. This can increase the risk of bone fractures later in life.

However, more recent research shows that caffeine - rather than phosphoric acid - is to blame for weaker bones.

The study published in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition shows that some fizzy drinks containing caffeine - such as cola drinks - can cause our bodies to excrete more calcium in our urine than normal.

But Catherine Collins of the British Dietetic Association (BDA) says we would have to drink a lot of cola flavoured drinks to harm our bones.

She says: 'Any significant calcium loss would mean drinking two to three litres a day of cola drinks. If you try to limit your cola intake to one to two a day, there is no health risk.' she says.

She does warn, however, that your bones may suffer if you drink mainly fizzy drinks - rather than varying your choice. Milk, in particular, is important for bone health.

She says: 'It is important to vary your liquid consumption by choosing drinks from a variety of sources such as fruit juice, milk, tea and coffee.'

'Alternating drinks in this way means you'll be getting a range of nutrients from your drinks and won't be missing out on vitamins for growth and calcium for bone building.'

Verdict: Drinking very large quantities of fizzy drinks containing caffeine could weaken your bones. Drinking one or two cans is not harmful to your body, but you should try and alternate carbonated drinks with drinks containing calcium - to promote good bone health - such as milk, tea or coffee.

Can fizzy drinks give me the 'jitters'? Most cola drinks and some other carbonated drinks contain caffeine as a flavouring. This can cause some people to feel hyper or 'jittery.'

Some of these drinks contain around 50mg of caffeine - that's around half the amount of caffeine contained in an average cup of coffee.

Nutritionists say small amounts of caffeine can affect people who are caffeine-sensitive.

'People with small body sizes tend to be more sensitive to caffeine than larger people. This is because they have less blood to soak up the caffeine,' says Catherine Collins.

Although palpitations caused by caffeine can sometimes cause alarm, dieticians say they do not pose a health risk.

The process that takes place is called vasoconstriction - when caffeine has the effect of closing up our blood vessels, slightly raising blood pressure and giving rise to the 'jitters'.

So if you get the 'jitters' limit your intake of fizzy drinks - or better still cut them out altogether.

Verdict: Too many fizzy drinks containing caffeine can make some people who are caffeine sensitive feel 'jittery'. If you feel 'jittery' after your fizzy drink, try to limit your intake to one can a day - or cut out carbonated drinks from your diet.

Can fizzy drinks make my child hyperactive? 

Can fizzy drinks make your child hyper?

There is much controversy among medics surrounding fizzy drinks and hyperactivity.

A small group of scientists claim that some flavourings and colourings found in carbonated drinks can trigger hyperactivity in children.

Dr Neil Ward, a senior lecturer in analytical chemistry at the University of Surrey, has carried out four independent studies looking at the impact of food additives on hyperactive children.

He found that tartrazine - a colouring also known as E102 - and phosphates - or E338 - can increase muscle activity in children leading to hyperactivity.

But nutritionists say there is no strong evidence to show that fizzy drinks cause hyperactivity.

Sarah Schenker of the British Nutrition Foundation says hyperactivity can be caused by a number of different reasons including behavioural problems and mild medical complaints.

'Fizzy drinks get blamed for all kinds of problems, but focusing on diet could be masking the real reason for hyperactivity,' she says.

Verdict: There is no strong evidence to support the view that fizzy drinks cause hyperactivity in children. If you notice this problem in your child, consult your GP.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

