TITLE	Fresh mushrooms 'slashes breast cancer risk'

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 4:46 PM on 16th March 2009

Eating a daily portion of mushrooms could slash the risk of breast cancer by up to two-thirds, according to new research.

Scientists found women consuming a third of an ounce of fresh mushrooms every day were 64 per cent less likely to develop a tumour. 

Dried mushrooms had a slightly less protective effect, reducing the risk by around half. 

The study, carried out in China, also showed women who combined a mushroom diet with regular consumption of green tea saw an even greater benefit. 

The risk among women in this group was reduced by almost 90 per cent. 

Researchers say the latest findings, published in the International Journal of Cancer, do not prove eating mushrooms will stop cancer and more studies are needed to confirm the results. 

But laboratory tests on animals do show the fungi have anti-tumour properties and can stimulate the immune system's defences. 

Some evidence suggests mushrooms act in a similar way to breast cancer drugs called aromatose inhibitors, which blocks the body's production of the cancer-feeding hormone oestrogen. 

Last month, scientists in California began a trial to see if taking mushroom extract twice a day for a month helps breast cancer survivors remain free of the disease. 

Around 40,000 women a year in Britain are diagnosed with breast cancer. The disease affects one in nine women at some point in their lives. Diet is thought to be a key factor.

Rates of the disease in China are four to five tines lower than in some western countries. 

Experts at the University of Western Australia in Perth studied more than 2,000 Chinese women. 

Roughly half the women had suffered breast cancer, while the rest were tumour-free. 

After taking account of other factors that could have contributed to cancer, such as being overweight, lack of exercise and smoking, scientists analysed eating habits. 

They found women who ate ten grammes or more a day of fresh or dried mushrooms were much less likely to have developed a tumour. 

Those also drinking green tea slashed their cancer risk even further. 

In a report on the findings the researchers said: 'Higher intake of mushrooms decreased cancer risk in both pre and post menopausal Chinese women.' 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

