TITLE	Health news: New drug to ease agony of shingles, HRT cuts risk of colon cancer and a pillow that can cure acne

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 11:34 PM on 16th March 2009

In our pick of top health stories this week: a new drug to help the skin condition of shingles is the most powerful yet, an American study of women who have used HRT has revealed a 45 per cent drop in risk of colon cancer and a pillow made from antibacterial fabric could get rid of acne 

Medicine tackles shingles virus 

 

 A new drug for shingles could be much more powerful than existing treatments. The drug, based on pioneering work at the University of Cardiff, is starting a trial for the treatment of a painful skin condition. 

The medicine, known as FV-100, stops the virus that causes the disease. 

Shingles, also known as herpes zoster, is a reactivation of the varicella zoster virus, the same virus that causes chicken pox. 

After someone has had chicken pox, the virus remains dormant in the nervous system. 

The immune system usually keeps the virus in check, but for some reason later in life, when the immune system may be weakened, it can be reactivated and cause shingles. 

There is no cure and symptoms can include long-term pain, a condition resulting from nerve damage caused by the virus. 

HRT cuts colon cancer risk in older women 

Older women taking the hormone replacement HRT may have a lower risk of colon cancer. 

An American study shows women who had taken HRT five years previously gained a 45 per cent drop in risk. 

Any use of HRT was linked with a 17 per cent cut in risk of colorectal cancer. 

It is thought the hormones may help reduce levels of insulin-like growth factors, thereby cutting the risk. Another theory is that HRT has an effect on mucus in the colon, limiting the number of cells that may progress to cancer. 

In the UK, an estimated one million women are taking HRT. Women are advised to use it for no longer than five years because of side effects, including an increased risk of breast cancer. 

Curing acne in your sleep 

Could a pillow treat acne while you are asleep? 

Made from a fabric that contains an anti-bacterial compound, the pillow is designed to lower levels of bacteria on the face. 

The fabric is half polyester and half nylon, which means it has a silk-like finish. Materials with a rough finish can irritate inflamed skin. 

Dermatologists who've developed the treated fabric claim it will help the skin heal during sleep over 12 weeks. 

Acne is caused by the overactivity of the sebaceous glands that secrete oily compounds. 

This build-up of oil creates an environment where bacteria can flourish. 

These then produce substances that trigger the immune system, causing the classic redness associated with spots. &#8226; www.precisionfabrics.com 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

