TITLE	Food watchdog warning over peanut butter brand containing 'cancer-causing fungus'

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 1:34 PM on 24th March 2009

The food watchdog have warned that thousands of jars of peanut butter are contaminated with cancer-causing chemicals.

The Food Standards Agency (FSA) said that jars of Active Peanut Butter have excess levels of a fungus produced by excess levels of alfatoxins - which can cause cancer.

The FSA say that the spread, which is made by Mardura in Ghana, is 'unsafe' for consumption and have told councils to order officers to seize and destroy the jars if they are spotted.

Active is sold in large plastic jars with a yellow lid and a red/yellow label.

The words &#8216;Active Peanut Butter&#8217; are written boldly on the label but the date marking and batch code are handwritten and illegible.

A spokesman for the FSA said: &#8216;Despite enquiries by local authorities in London, the Agency has been unable to establish distribution details. 

&#8216;In previous cases believed to have involved this company, distribution was restricted to the London area and appeared to be distributed through direct van sales, where retailers who sell African or Afro-Caribbean food products are the main clients.'

It states that local authorities should ensure the jars are immediately seized if they are spotted, adding: &#8216;If any of these products are found during routine inspections, enforcement officers should ensure that they are withdrawn from sale and detained pending further action.&#8217; 

Aflatoxins are a type of toxin found naturally in some foods. 

They are produced by certain moulds that grow on foods in tropical and sub-tropical countries. 

There maybe an increased risk of cancer in people whose diets include high levels of aflatoxins. 

For this reason, in the UK and the rest of the EU, there are legal limits for aflatoxins in foods, to make sure that people take in as little of them as possible.

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

