TITLE	Health news: Red wine can stop weight gain, anti-smoking drug is calming and band aid for chemo patients

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 10:26 PM on 23rd March 2009

In our pick of top health stories this week, how red wine can reduce fat storage, a drug that helps smokers quit can also be used to ease restless legs and cancer patients to be offered acupressure wrist bands.

Red wine can stop weight gain 

 

Could drinking red wine prevent you from gaining weight? New research shows that red wine seems to reduce fat storage within the body by increasing levels of oestrogen. 

The female sex hormone plays a role in the body's metabolism of fat. It also controls fat distribution.

 

Research at the University of Porto in Portugal shows that animals treated with red wine gained significantly less weight than controls who were given no alcohol but did the same amount of exercise over an eight-week period. 

Exactly what it is in red wine that increases levels of oestrogen is unknown. 

However, previous studies have found that resveratrol, the chemical in red wine believed to reduce the risk of heart disease, is a form of oestrogen. 

The substance is highly concentrated in the skin of grapes and is abundant in red wine.

Anti-smoking drug calms restless legs 

A drug that helps smokers quit may ease the symptoms of restless legs. In one American study a patient was symptomfree in three days. 

Restless legs syndrome is estimated to affect around one million people in the UK.

 Sufferers have unpleasant sensations in their legs accompanied by an overwhelming urge to move them. 

It's thought to be caused by an imbalance of the brain chemical dopamine, which is involved in movement. 

In the evening, dopamine levels fall, which may explain why the symptoms worsen at night. 

The drug bupropion, an antidepressant, works by increasing levels of three brain chemicals - dopamine, serotonin and norepinephrine. 

Its biggest effect is on dopamine. In a trial, 100 patients with restless legs are being given the drug or placebo to take each night for six weeks.

Band aid for chemo patients 

Cancer patients might soon be offered acupressure wrist bands to alleviate nausea.

 This is a common side-effect of chemotherapy, experienced by more than 75 per cent of patients undergoing the treatment. 

Acupressure wrist bands - which apply force to a pressure point on the wrist - are used to treat travel sickness. 

But doctors at Liverpool University believe they could also help cancer patients. 

More than 700 patients at nine NHS centres will take part in a trial to see how well the bands control chemotherapy-related nausea. 

Professor Mari Lloyd-Williams, a consultant in palliative medicine who is leading the trial, says: 'Patients rank nausea and vomiting among the most distressing side-effects of chemotherapy. 

'If the trials are successful, we should be able to control this debilitating symptom with a drug-free therapy.' 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

