TITLE	The tanorexia timebomb: Sunbeds blamed as skin cancer soars in young women

 By Daniel Martin Last updated at 12:40 AM on 8th April 2009

 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

The deadliest form of skin cancer has become the most commonly diagnosed cancer among women in their 20s for the first time.

Experts said a 'binge-tanning' epidemic had propelled malignant melanoma above cervical cancer. 

Almost every day, one woman aged between 20 and 29 is diagnosed with skin cancer. In this age group there are now twice as many cases of melanoma as there are breast cancer. 

Last night campaigners slammed the Government for dragging its heels over plans to ban the use of sunbeds by under-18s. 

Ministers raised the idea last April - but have done nothing about it, even though studies show regular sunbed use under the age of 30 increases melanoma risk by 75 per cent. 

They also suggested outlawing unstaffed, coin-operated tanning booths, which are thought to attract younger users and are around three times as powerful as a decade ago. 

A 20-minute visit to one of these booths is equivalent to spending a day at the beach, which doctors say can cause lasting damage. 

Estimates are that three million Britons regularly use sunbeds despite concerns over the health risks. 

The Cancer Research UK figures from 2005 - the latest available - show that 338 women aged between 20 and 29 were diagnosed with melanoma, compared with 298 for cervical cancer.

Melanoma diagnoses have soared by a third since 2003, when there were 220 cases, compared with 270 for cervical cancer. Experts say the number of cases is almost certain to have risen yet further in the years since 2005. 

And for women in their 30s, melanoma has risen to be the third most common cancer after breast and cervix tumours. 

Nina Goad, of the British Association of Dermatologists, said: 'These shocking figures show it is now time for action.' 

Caroline Cerny, Cancer Research UK's SunSmart campaign manager, blamed 'binge-tanning' - particularly under sunbeds - for the increase. 

'Spending too much time on sunbeds is just as dangerous as staying out too long in the sun,' she said. Sunbeds don't offer a safe way to tan. The intensity of UV rays in some sunbeds can be more than ten times stronger than the midday sun. 

'Excessive exposure to UV damages the DNA in skin cells which increases the risk of skin cancer and makes skin age faster. 

   More... 'I was hooked on sunbeds twice a day. Then my skin fell off and I needed chemotherapy' 

'But, importantly, if people take care not to burn in the sun and don't use sunbeds, the majority of malignant melanoma could be prevented.' 

The sunbed industry estimates there are more than 6,000 registered tanning salons in the UK - but this figure does not include those who are unregistered, such as the many hair salons who have a sunbed round the back. 

Around 50 women under the age of 40 die from melanoma every year, and overall the disease kills 1,800 Britons every year.

By 2024, Cancer Research UK believes malignant melanoma will be the fourth most common cancer among both men and women of all ages, rising from 9,000 cases diagnosed every year to more than 15,500. 

A survey last year found that one in three women had used a sunbed, and that 80 per cent of these first used a sunbed under the age of 35. Some 9 per cent of 11 to 17-year-old girls have used a sunbed. 

Sara Hiom, Cancer Research UK's director of health information, said: 'It is extremely worrying to see that so many young girls are using sunbeds. Young skin is delicate and so easily damaged by the sun. 

'Damage from UV builds up over time. Every time young people use a sunbed they are harming their skin and increasing their risk of cancer.' 

At present a voluntary code of practice keeps under-16s from using sunbeds - but only one in four tanning salons have signed up to it. 

Kathy Banks, chief executive of the Sunbed Association, the industry body, claimed cutting sunbed use could cost lives because 'regular, moderate exposure to UV is the greatest source of vitamin D production', which some studies have suggested can protect against cancer. 

'The fact is the jury is out on the relationship between UV exposure and malignant melanoma,' she said. 

A spokesman for the Department of Health said: 'We are taking the lead on reviewing options for possible regulation of the sunbed industry. 

'We strongly advise against the use of sunbeds for cosmetic purposes, particularly by minors. However, we recognise the right of individuals to make informed choices.'

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

