TITLE	Men look away: Oral sex REALLY does cause some throat cancers

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 11:46 AM on 8th April 2009

 It is a fact most men will not want to know, but research has proven that a virus which is contracted through oral sex can cause throat cancer.

A study conducted by Johns Hopkins University has revealed that the HPV virus poses a greater risk in contracting cancer than smoking or alcohol. 

The American study of 300 people also found that that those with more than six partners were almost nine times at greater risk of contracting the disease.

And those who had already experienced a previous oral HPV infection were 32 times more likely to develop cancer.

HPV is the cause of roughly 70 per cent of cervical cancers.

However experts said a wider study was needed to confirm the findings. 

Researchers said oral sex was the main mode of transmission of HPV but could not rule out that it could also be passed through kissing.

During the study, men and women who had been recently diagnosed with oropharyngeal cancer had blood and saliva samples taken and were also asked about their sexual practices and family history.

They found HPV16 - one of the most common cancer-causing strains of the virus - was present in the tumours of 72 per cent of cancer patients.

Scientists said the majority of HPV infections had no symptoms and often did not require treatment.

But they also said a small percentage of those who contracted high-risk strains may go on to develop cancer.

Study author Dr Gypsyamber D'Souza told the BBC: 'It is important for health care providers to know that people without the traditional risk factors of tobacco and alcohol use can nevertheless be at risk of oropharyngeal cancer.'

 Co-researcher Dr Maura Gillison said that oropharyngeal cancer is still relatively uncommon and that most people who contracted HPV probably wouldn't develop throat cancer.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

