TITLE	Asbestos in schools will kill pupils, warns teacher dying of lung cancer

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 11:08 AM on 18th April 2009

 

Children are at risk of dying from cancer in adulthood after being exposed to asbestos in schools, teachers warned today.

More than 170 teachers have already died from mesothelioma, a fatal disease caused by asbestos, members of the NASUWT union said.

Carole Hagedorn, a foreign languages teacher from Essex, was diagnosed with the disease last summer after exposure to asbestos during more than 30 years of working in schools.

She told delegates at the NASUWT's annual conference in Bournemouth: 'When, at the beginning of my career, I went into classrooms to teach year eights the perfect tense, I did not expect it to end with an industrial disease.'

Following her diagnosis, Mrs Hagedorn has had to give up teaching, and endured 18 weeks of chemotherapy. The average life expectancy from diagnosis is between six and 18 months, she said.

'I am understandably unhappy that the lack of proper asbestos control will end my life prematurely, like some sort of collateral damage or natural wastage in the education game,' she said.

Mrs Hagedorn warned: 'It is believed that a single fibre of asbestos may cause mesothelioma. There is no such thing as safe asbestos or a safe limit.

'Children are thought to be much more susceptible than adults, though we won't know for another 20 to 30 years how many will already have contracted this cancer from exposure in schools because of its long latency period.'

Mrs Hagedorn, who received a standing ovation after telling her story, called for a national risk assessment of asbestos in schools, and for it to be cleared as quickly as possible.

The responsibility for protecting children and teachers lies wholly with government, she said.

She said: 'Please help to ensure that our children and grandchildren do not also succumb to this devastating cancer.'

Speaking afterwards, Mrs Hagedorn said that one of the current problems is that when discovering how someone contracted mesothelioma, it is a case of looking back over a long period of time.

She said: 'Children who are contracting this disease at present in our schools, they won't know another 10, 20, 30 or 40 years that they've got it.'

Mrs Hagedorn could not give any more details about her own case because of ongoing legal action.

The NASUWT today unanimously passed a resolution calling for pressure to be put on the Government to work towards removing all asbestos from all educational establishments by 2012.

Proposing the motion, Hank Roberts, a secondary school teacher from Brent, said that it is estimated that 90 per cent of England's schools contain asbestos.

Between 1980 and 2005, 178 teachers died from mesothelioma, he said.

Mr Roberts said: 'Teachers have died from mesothelioma after exposure to asbestos from sticking drawing pins into asbestos boards.

'Every drawing pin pushed in releases approximately 6,000 asbestos fibres. One fibre can kill.'

Mr Roberts accused the Government of "deliberate and knowing murder" for failing to remove asbestos from schools.

He said: 'If you know people will die as a result of your inaction when you could act, how is that not murder?'

Asbestos was routinely used in ceilings, wall linings and plumbing in thousands of schools built between the 1940s and 1970s.

According to research funded by Cancer Research UK and the Health and Safety Executive (HSE), the UK's overall mesothelioma death rate is now the highest in the world, with 1,749 deaths in men in 2005, equivalent to one in 40 of all male cancer deaths below the age of 80.

In 2005, there were also 288 deaths in women. 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

