TITLE	Pregnancy hormone is new breast cancer hope

 By Fiona Macrae Last updated at 1:03 AM on 21st April 2009

A hormone that heralds pregnancy could hold the key to preventing breast cancer. 

Human chorionic gonadotropin, or hCG, which is produced by the embryo soon after conception, is the tell-tale chemical detected by pregnancy testing kits. 

It is thought to help the breast mature, leading to a lower rate of tumours in women who have had babies. 

Now scientists believe that given as a series of injections it could prevent young women at high risk of the disease from developing it as they grow older. 

The first trials on women with a family history of breast cancer are underway. However, it will be a number of years before the jabs are suitable for widespread use. 

To investigate the protective effect of hCG, the U.S. researchers gave a short course of the hormone to female rats, before exposing of them to a cancer-causing drug. More than 90 per cent of rats not given hCG developed breast cancer, compared with 15 per cent of those treated. 

And when tumours did develop in this group, they took longer to form, were fewer in number and smaller, the American Association for Cancer Research's annual conference heard. 

The researchers, from the Fox Chase Cancer Centre in Philadelphia, have now started a trial in young women who have inherited a gene that puts them at high risk of breast cancer. 

The women, who are aged around 20, will be given jabs of hCG for three months. 

It is hoped that samples of breast tissue at the start and end of the trial will show that the hCG triggers genetic changes linked to the maturation of the breast and protection against cancer. 

If further trials are successful, the hormone could be given to women in their late teens and early 20s who have a high risk of breast cancer. 

Researcher Dr Johana Vanegas said: 'The ability to replicate the naturally protective effects of pregnancy against breast cancer will hold significant public health value. 

'Any treatment should be targeted to those at high risk of breast cancer. 

'I don't think it would be necessary to give it to everybody because there are other ways to prevent cancer through diet and healthy lifestyle.' 

Dr Sarah Rawlings, of Breakthrough Breast Cancer said: 'The role that hCG could play in this is interesting but further research is still needed before we will know whether it could be used in humans.'

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

