TITLE	How well-done meat can raise the risk of getting cancer

 By David Derbyshire Last updated at 12:00 AM on 22nd April 2009

 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

Eating overcooked red meat has been linked to a two-thirds rise in the risk of developing cancer of the pancreas. 

In a nine-year study of more than 62,000 subjects, those who liked their steak well done were found to be almost 60 per cent more likely to get the disease than those who avoided steak or liked it rare. 

And the individuals who ate the largest quantity of well-done meat were 70 per cent more likely to develop the cancer than those with the lowest intake. 

Dr Kristin Anderson, the University of Minnesota School of Public Health researcher who made the discovery, said frying, grilling and barbecuing red meat could form cancer-causing chemicals called acrylamides and heterocyclic amines. 

These carcinogens are not formed when meat is baked or stewed, she told the American Association for Cancer Research. 

Dr Anderson said: 'We cannot say with absolute certainty that the risk is increased due to carcinogens formed in burned meat. 

'However, those who enjoy either fried or barbecued meat should consider turning down the heat or cutting off burned portions when it's finished; cook meat sufficiently to kill bacteria without excess charring. 

'In addition, the precursors of cancer-causing compounds can be reduced by microwaving the meat for a few minutes and pouring off the juices before cooking it on the grill.' 

Dr Anderson said she had focused on pancreatic cancer because treatment for the disease is very limited and it is often 'rapidly fatal'. It is the tenth most common cancer in the UK, with around 7,600 diagnoses a year. 

Past studies have found a link between charred meat and cancers of the colon, stomach and prostate. 

Acrylamides are not only found in meat cooked at a high heat, but also in crisps, coffee, breakfast cereals, burnt toast and roast potatoes. 

In 2002, Swedish scientists discovered high doses of acrylamides in a range of processed and cooked foods. 

The Food Standards Agency agrees that acrylamides are carcinogens, but says they are too widespread to avoid in a balanced diet. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

