TITLE	New radiation fear over building used by atom pioneer Rutherford as cancer kills sixth ex-worker

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 12:56 AM on 25th April 2009

 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

A sixth ex-employee at a university building linked with a radiation scare has died of cancer. 

Professor Tom Whiston worked in the former laboratory where Nobel prize winner Ernest Rutherford experimented with radioactive materials in the early 20th century. 

As with two former colleagues who used the rooms at Manchester University, Dr Hugh Wagner and Dr Arthur Reader, he died of pancreatic cancer - a rare form of the disease. 

Two others who used the building have died of brain tumours while another case has also been linked to it. 

Liz Graham, the solicitor for some of the affected families, said: 'Pancreatic cancer is quite a rare form of cancer. Questions need to be asked about whether there is a link.' 

The university has said there is no evidence of radiation in the building, but has asked an independent expert to investigate. 

Professor Whiston, who specialised in science and technology policy had been living in Brighton and was an honorary professor at Sussex University. 

He worked in the Rutherford rooms - which was turned into the psychology department in 1972 - earlier in his career. He died aged 70 earlier this month. 

   More... Lab that housed Rutherford radiation experiments is shut after four staff die and two more are diagnosed with cancer 

New Zealand-born Rutherford, one of the modern world's greatest scientists, is credited with almost single-handedly inventing the study of nuclear physics when he was a professor at Manchester until 1919.

He discovered that every atom has a nucleus, that radioactivity is caused by disintegrations of atoms and that some elements could be disintegrated by a collision with particles from a radioactive source.

Four rooms used by Rutherford underwent a clean-up after radioactivity and mercury were detected there ten years ago. Two months ago several areas were sealed off for decontamination after fresh investigations revealed traces of toxic mercury vapour under the floorboards. 

University bosses insist that there is no evidence of any risk to staff but have called in Professor David Coggan, an expert in workplace disease at Southampton University, to investigate. 

In a letter to Manchester University staff last month, Prof Coggan said the cluster of deaths was 'unusual' but added that he could not yet rule out sheer coincidence because there was no evidence linking pancreatic cancer to mercury or ionising radiation.

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

