TITLE	Having your nails done could give you skin cancer, doctors warn women

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 10:49 AM on 29th April 2009

Women who visit beauty salons to have their nails done could be increasing their risk of skin cancer, according to a new report.

Doctors raised the alarm after two women developed tumours on their hands from exposure to ultra-violet lamps used to fix artificial nails.

The lamps, which cost as little as £30, are used in thousands of beauty salons across the UK and can also be bought for home use.

But experts now fear the high dose of UVA rays - the most dangerous form of ultra-violet light - they produce could be damaging skin cells.

Dermatologists at the University of Texas are calling for further investigations into the safety of UV nail lamps.

Regular users should have their hands and fingers inspected for signs of cancerous growths, they said.

The number of nail bars in the UK have risen sharply in recent years.

Most specialise in nail extensions which can be fixed on to a customer's own nails, then painted or decorated.

But there have already been concerns that poorly trained nail technicians may be putting customers' health at risk by using cheap but potentially hazardous chemicals.

One such agent, called methyl methacrylate - or MMA - is banned in the US, Australia and New Zealand but not in the UK.

The chemical has been linked with respiratory problems and serious allergic skin reactions.

Labour MP Dr Phyllis Starkey has called for Parliament to introduce a new bill for the compulsory licensing of nail bars and salons.

The latest alert, published in the journal Archives of Dermatology, could heighten fears over their safety.

A 48-year-old woman in good health needed repeated surgery to remove several cancers from her right hand after having UV light treatment at nail salons eight times in one year.

A second woman, aged 55, also developed a tumour on her right hand after using UV lamps twice a month for 15 years.

In both cases, the tumour involved was a squamous cell carcinoma, a less harmful strain than deadly malignant melanoma.

Although they can be removed with surgery, in around four per cent of cases the cancer spreads to other parts of the body.

In a report on the two cases, Dr Deborah MacFarlane from the University of Texas Anderson Cancer Centre in Houston, said: 'The UV nail lamp is most commonly used to cure gel nails but is also used to cure acrylic nails and dry traditional nail polish.

'But exposure to UV light is a major risk factor for the development of skin cancer.' Caroline Cerny, Cancer Research UK's Sunsmart campaign manager, said it was too early to say for certain that nail lamps are a serious threat to health.

She said: 'Based on just two cases, we can't be sure if the nail lights contributed to the skin cancers in these women.

'But we know that overexposure to artificial sources of UV radiation, such as sunbeds, can increase the risk of skin cancer - so there is no reason to believe that nail lights won't pose a similar risk.'

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

