TITLE	Taking aspirin in your 40s 'cuts cancer risk'

 By Jenny Hope Last updated at 1:23 AM on 29th April 2009

 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

 

Healthy people in their 40s could cut their risk of cancer in later life with a regular dose of aspirin, according to scientists. 

Taking aspirin for at least ten years before the time when cancers normally develop, can maximise the drug's effect, according to a review of studies involving more than 50,000. 

Previous research has suggested that men and women taking aspirin are less likely to develop bowel, breast and other cancers, including prostate. 

Aspirin blocks the effects of COX enzymes, proteins which help trigger inflammation and are associated with a number of types of cancer. 

Many of the middle-aged already take lowdose aspirin daily as an 'insurance policy' while others take it on their GP's advice to prevent a repeat heart attack. 

There has been growing pressure for 'blanket prescribing' of aspirin, with a report from British researchers last year suggesting most healthy men over 48 and women over 57 would benefit. 

Aspirin is also an ingredient of the 'Polypill', a cheap multi-drug tablet being developed to cut the toll of heart attacks. 

The latest study comes from scientists at Cancer Research UK, who reviewed all available evidence on aspirin and cancer prevention. Their findings are published today in The Lancet Oncology. 

Professor Jack Cuzick, from the Cancer Research UK Centre for Epidemiology, at Queen Mary, University of London, said: ' Taking aspirin regularly in your mid-40s could maximise the effect this drug has on preventing cancer. Taking aspirin at this age, which is about the time pre-cancerous lesions usually begin to develop, may be the best time to stop the disease from progressing to actual cancer.' 

Doctors tend to advise against healthy people taking aspirin on a long-term basis because it can cause stomach ulcers and dangerous bleeding in the gut. 

Professor Cuzick said: 'As the risk of serious side effects greatly increases after 60 years old, taking long-term treatment before then will help minimise these side effects.' 

The scientists also found that taking aspirin in combination with other drugs known as proton pump inhibitors could lower the risk of stomach bleeding. 

But Professor Cuzick said it was still too early to recommend the regular use of aspirin for cancer prevention. 

He said: 'Future research and more clinical trials are needed to better identify those people who are at high risk of developing cancers and at low risk of side effects, who will benefit most from aspirin treatment. 

'Some studies did not show a preventative effect, but the follow-up was less than ten years, so it may have been too early to see the effect.' 

Aspirin may also provide protection against cancer for older patients who are already taking it for cardiovascular disease. 

But Professor Cuzick said that it was not yet known whether low-dose 75mg aspirin could do this, or if the full standard dose of 300mg would be needed each day. 

Dr Lesley Walker, of Cancer Research UK, said 'We need scientists to focus their efforts on how to reduce the side effects of taking aspirin so that very soon it may be possible to use the drug as a way of preventing cancer. 

'It's too soon to recommend that people take aspirin to try and stop cancer developing because of the side effects.' 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

