TITLE	Health news: How folic acid could lower the risk of cancer and antibiotics can help appendix pain

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 4:01 PM on 5th May 2009

Folic acid is being tested to see if it can lower a woman's risk of cervical cancer. A trial is looking at whether supplements can stop or delay the development of the disease in women infected with human papillomavirus or HPV, implicated in 99 per cent of cervical cancers. 

The new trial follows research showing that women with high levels of folic acid have a lower risk of becoming HPV positive. 

Folic acid, known as folate in its natural form, is one of the B-group of vitamins and is found naturally in small amounts in many foods, such as broccoli, asparagus, chickpeas and brown rice. 

In the U.S.trial, women will take a daily supplement for a year to assess its protective effect.

 Researchers believe low levels of the vitamin reduce the effectiveness of the immune system, increasing the risk of infection with HPV. 

Implanting electrodes in the brain may help to reduce the symptoms of cluster headaches. 

New research shows that occipital nerve stimulation (ONS) reduces symptoms by up to 95 per cent. 

   More... The new male contraceptive jab that is nearly 100% effective 

Around 60,000 Britons suffer from the condition - excruciatingly painful headaches that occur in bouts, sometimes lasting for months at a time. 

With the new technique, electrodes are used to stimulate the occipital nerve with electric pulses. This then blocks the pain messages in another key nerve in the brain. 

Patients in the U.S. trial, who had gained no benefit from other therapies, saw improvements within days. After the battery-powered device was turned off, the attacks returned. 

Patients admitted to hospital with appendicitis could get better just by taking antibiotics. 

The study, by Swedish doctors, shows medicine is just as effective as an operation. The advantage is patients are not left scarred and aren't at risk from infection. 

However, around one in seven of those treated with drugs suffer a recurrence of appendicitis within the first year after treatment. 

The appendix is a small worm-like pouch attached to the colon, or large bowel. Its exact function remains unknown, but it can become inflamed and painful. 

Around 10,000 patients a year in England and Wales have emergency surgery under a general anaesthetic. 

The latest research showed the drug treatment was effective in 90.8 per cent of patients, compared with 89.2per cent in those who had surgery. 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

