TITLE	Fish cancer scare

Experts fear people who eat fish from waters contaminated by a radioactive pollutant discharged by nuclear plants and factories are at a greater risk of developing cancer than was previously thought.

The health risk from exposure to tritium remains low since doses are still within international safety limits.

But scientists are concerned that people who eat fish from waters contaminated by tritium may have received much higher levels of radiation than had been estimated before, according to a report in New Scientist magazine.

The report indicates that tritium is twice as likely to cause cancer as was previously thought.

Tritium is an isotope of hydrogen. Vast amounts of the material were released into the atmosphere by nuclear weapons tests in the 1960s, and large quantities are still discharged by nuclear plants such as Sellafield in Cumbria.

It was discharges from a factory in Wales making isotopes for the drugs industry that alerted scientists to the potential hazards of tritium, New Scientist reported.

Levels of the material in fish near the Nycomed Amersham plant in Cardiff were hundreds of times higher than expected.

The discovery in 1998 prompted the National Radiological Protection Board (NRPB) to take a new look at the amount of radiation people are exposed to when they eat fish from the Severn Estuary.

The NRPB has now concluded that they receive twice the dose that was assumed in the past, said the magazine.

Evidence from animals studies suggested that tritium-carbon compounds may persist in the body for longer than was previously thought, and the biological effect of tritium in water may be more damaging.

However John Harrison from the NRPB stressed that even with the risk doubled it was still very small. Even people exposed to the highest doses would be within international safety limits.

"People should not be particularly concerned about this," he said.

But Barrie Lambert, a radiation expert at St Bartholomew's Hospital in London, said the finding could have significant implications for people who eat a lot of fish from around the Cardiff plant.

International regulatory agencies say that to minimise the risk people should not be exposed to more than 300 microsieverts of radiation a year.

Mr Lambert said the current radiation dose from fish near Cardiff could reach 133 microsieverts a year. In the past, when tritium discharges were at their maximum, that dose could have been twice as high again.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

