TITLE	Obesity 'causes 19,000 cancer cases every year'

 By Jenny Hope Last updated at 12:55 AM on 11th May 2009

Almost 19,000 Britons a year develop cancer because they are overweight, researchers say.

The toll is 50 per cent higher than any previous estimate, reflecting the current epidemic of obesity.

Adults are being warned to stay as slim as possible, without being underweight, to minimise their cancer risk.

The new analysis, by the World Cancer Research Fund, found excess fat was linked to around 17 per cent of cases of seven main cancers - breast, bowel, oesophagus, kidney, pancreas, endometrium (womb lining) and gallbladder.

Professor Martin Wiseman, WCRF medical and scientific adviser, said: 'The stark fact is that every year in this country, many thousands of people are diagnosed with cancer that could have been prevented if they had maintained a healthy weight.

'This is a real cause for concern and the problem is only going to get worse if the number of people who are overweight continues to rise.'

The new estimate is nearly 50 per cent higher than the 13,000 cases a year linked to obesity by the charity Cancer Research UK.

WCRF, a charity that promotes ways of preventing the disease, says the evidence is now much stronger than even ten years ago.

Body fat promotes the production of hormones and growth factors such as oestrogen and insulin which can increase the risk of cancer. 

Obese people are also less likely to eat healthy amounts of fruit and vegetables that can protect against cancer.

Professor Wiseman said: 'After not smoking, maintaining a healthy weight is the most important thing you can do. 

'But a recent survey showed almost 40 per cent of people still do not know excess fat is a cause of cancer. We need to do more to spread the message.'

Overall, scientists estimate that about a third of the most common cancers could be prevented if people improved their lifestyles - eating more healthily, taking more physical activity and maintaining a healthy weight.

The WCRF says people should aim for a Body Mass Index - calculated by dividing weight in kilograms by height in metres squared - towards the lower end of the recommended healthy range of 18.5 to 24.9.  

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

