TITLE	Gwyneth Paltrow says shampoo causes cancer. Is she right?

 By Angela Epstein Last updated at 9:08 PM on 16th May 2009

 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

The claim: The actress believes that using shampoo could lead to cancer, after reading research about what she calls the 'environmental toxins' allegedly found in these products. 

She said on her website: 'Foetuses, infants and toddlers are unable to metabolise toxins the way that adults are, and we are constantly filling our environments with chemicals that may or may not be safe. The research is troubling; the incidence of diseases in children such as asthma, cancer and autism have shot up exponentially.' 

The facts: According to Cancer Research UK, there is no evidence to support Paltrow's claim. Its director of cancer information, Dr Lesley Walker, says: 'There has been little change in the number of childhood cancers detected during the past ten years. There are a lot of scare stories around environmental carcinogens but scant evidence to back them up.' 

The problem, says toxicologist Elizabeth Salter-Green, director of CHEM Trust, is that while individual chemicals may be safe, what isn't known is their collective potential effect. 'It is this cocktail effect that we need to be concerned about,' she adds. 

The claim: When launching her new skincare range, Stella McCartney said: 'Your skin is your largest organ, and up to 60 per cent of what you put on it is absorbed into the system. Lots of skin products use the same petrochemicals as the antifreeze in your car!' 

The facts: Some chemicals that are found in antifreeze, such as propylene glycol, are added to creams as emulsifying agents so that they glide on to the skin. 

But Arthur Weston, professor of pharmacology at the University of Manchester, says the amount used in cosmetics is so tiny that any effect would be negligible. 'It's not as if we are eating the cream,' he says. 'Only a tiny amount could be absorbed through the skin so there is no risk at all to using this.' 

 

The claim: The TV cook maintains that obesity stems not only from people not eating square meals, but from becoming addicted to sugar. 'You need to have six weeks without either sugar or sweetener,' she says. 'After six weeks, everything will taste sweet, because you will have got your palate back to what nature created. We could cure the nation if we cut down sugar addiction.' 

The facts: Obesity has many causes, explains independent nutritionist Dr Sarah Schenker, so you cannot blame sugar consumption alone for the rising problem. 'It is important to reduce sugary snacks between meals but to suggest it is an addiction puts it in line with narcotics, which doesn't stack up,' she says. 'There is some truth in Delia's six-week theory since repetitive behaviour stimulates the neural pathways in the nerves and it takes about six weeks for this to take effect. After about two weeks - the hardest - there would be less desire for sugar. By six weeks it may well have gone.' 

The claim: Following her mother Sharon's battle with colon cancer, Kelly said she was convinced it had been caused by the Pill. 'I don't have a microwave in my house for the same reason,' she adds. 

The facts: The alleged link between the Pill and colon cancer is very contentious, says Dr Paul Hurlstone, consultant endoscopist and gastroenterologist at Barnsley NHS Foundation Trust, as the evidence suggesting it increases incidence is slim. 

'The incidence of colorectal cancer is lower in women than men but that's for many reasons, so it would be difficult to extract one element such as the Pill. It's also worth noting it has some protective action against ovarian cancer.' 

Dr Paddy Regan, a physicist at the University of Surrey, adds that although microwave ovens can alter the nutritional value of some foods if they are overcooked, when used correctly 'cooking in a microwave is not dangerous and won't cause cancer'.

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

