TITLE	Three cups of tea a day 'can cut heart attack risk by 70%'

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 12:01 AM on 22nd May 2009

Drinking three cups of tea a day can ward off heart attacks, a dietician has claimed. 

The beverage could even have anti-cancer properties, a review of previous research suggests. 

The link between coronary heart disease and tea has been the subject of a large number of studies. 

Dr Carrie Ruxton, a member of the Tea Advisory Panel, analysed some of these, which highlighted the effectiveness of naturally occurring compounds called flavonoids in combating heart attacks. 

One Finnish study found men who drank more than two cups of tea a day had a 21 per cent reduced chance of stroke. 

French research showed that women who drank more than three cups a day had a 32 per cent lower risk of blocked arteries. 

Dr Ruxton said the research showed at least three cups of tea a day can lower the risk of a heart attack by up to 70 per cent. 

She said: 'We are not sure of the exact mechanism, but it is thought that tea flavonoids could be involved in controlling inflammation, reducing thrombosis, promoting blood vessel function and helping to limit furring up of the arteries.' 

The studies found tea may be 'a useful addition to an anti-cancer diet', she added, but further research was needed. 

Dr Ruxton said: 'Tea may be a national favourite but it also has health benefits thanks to its high flavonoid content.

   More... A traditional cuppa is as good for you as green tea, say researchers Cuppa that could help beat the bulge: Scientist finds slimming ingredient in white tea 

'My research shows there is a growing amount of evidence which indicates tea can play a role in helping to combat cardiovascular problems such as heart disease and stroke. 

'This area of research is very exciting for the future. We also found solid evidence of tea helping to boost cognitive function and reduce stress, probably related to tea's modest caffeine content. 

'Some interesting research on the role of tea flavonoids in helping to combat certain neurological conditions is emerging.'  

She added: 'Research shows you do not need to drink gallons of tea to get real improvements just three or four cups of tea a day are enough.'  

Dr Catherine Hood, another Tea Advisory Panel member, said: 'The scientific community is learning more and more about tea and its health properties. 

'Studies show that there are some very powerful ingredients in tea that can play a hugely important role in protecting the body from some serious and potentially fatal conditions. 

'A cuppa is a great way to relax or unwind but could also give your health a crucial boost. 

'Just a few cups a day have been shown to help and drinking more isn't a problem either as up to eight cups a day have been shown to be fine.'   

Tea is the most consumed drink after water with 131,150 tons of tea consumed in the UK in 2006/07. 

Nearly eight in ten adults drink an average of 2.3 mugs a day. 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

