TITLE	Tandemic! How love of sunbeds has sent skin cancer soaring

 By Mark Anstead Last updated at 10:01 PM on 23rd May 2009

 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

Cheryl Cole has one, as does Chelsy Davy - they're not exactly in the same social league but they both share a love of tans. Like millions of other twentysomethings caught up in this tandemic, they believe being bronzed makes them look fit and healthy, and who would disagree with them? 

However, new statistics from Cancer Research UK reveal that tanning can be a killer. It is now the most common cause of malignant melanoma among 15 to 34-year-olds, and sunbeds double the risk of developing it. 

Incidences have quadrupled in the UK since the Seventies, when sunbeds were first introduced, rising faster than any other form of cancer. 

While 70,000 in the UK are diagnosed with skin cancer every year, malignant melanoma is diagnosed in more than 9,500 cases - this is the most serious form of skin cancer and leads to death in more than a quarter of cases. 

The latest figures from the Department of Health indicate that about a quarter of adults and nearly one in ten young people under the age of 17 have used sunbeds. Shockingly, almost one fifth of the under-17s said they did so in an unsupervised setting. 

Former Coronation Street actor Andy Newton Lee vividly remembers the moment four years ago when he realised he could die from skin cancer. It was two weeks after having a biopsy to remove a discoloured patch of skin below his left knee and he was at a music festival chatting to a woman in the hospitality lounge. 

'I still wasn't taking my biopsy very seriously,' says Andy, 27, best known for playing ladies' man Robbie Flynn in Channel 4's Hollyoaks. 

'I thought I was too young to have developed skin cancer. In fact, the only reason I had my spot checked was because my mother and sister were hassling me. 

'I showed the woman the scar from my biopsy and she blurted out that a friend of hers had died from malignant melanoma. That stopped me in my tracks.' 

If that wasn't bad enough, Andy later discovered, after a second biopsy, that he had another melanoma on his other leg. Today, he lays the blame firmly upon his regular use of sunbeds as a teenager, and he is keen to talk about his experiences to help raise awareness of the dangers. 

'I now tell everyone to avoid sunbeds and cover up in the sun,' he says. 

Andy regularly supports Cancer Research UK and takes part in events to raise money for them, including the London Marathon. 

'I thought skin cancer would never be a problem for me because I have olive skin that tans easily,' he says. 'You never think it will happen to you, but this thing just crept up on me.' 

Iain Mack, managing director of skin cancer screening specialists The Mole Clinic in London, says: 'All ages are at risk and the incidence goes up dramatically in anyone who has ever been sunburned, even in darker skin types. This is especially true if the sunburn occurs in children.' 

Born and raised in a three-bedroom terrace house in Hull, he grew up believing a tan was a sign of good health. 

'It was a common thing in my area,' he says. 'The idea was to boost your tan before going on holiday and we used to hire sunbeds to use at home. They only cost £20 a month. 

'My mother would hire one in the spring and again in winter for an all-year-round tan. I was warned not to use it but I just waited for my parents to go out and then went on it for 40 minutes at a time. Sometimes I would use it every day.' 

At Hull University, where Andy went to study law in 2000, he joined the rugby team and found that most of his team-mates used sunbeds in salons. 

Then, after his second year, he was offered a role in Hollyoaks and he dropped out of university, only to be surrounded by young actors who also valued the importance of 'a healthy tan'. 

'Hollyoaks was a show filled with young, pretty people,' he says, 'and we were all trying to look our best so a lot of the lads used sunbeds secretly. It was just ingrained into our way of thinking that to have a tan was an attractive thing.' 

Andy first noticed a dark brown area about the size of a fingernail developing on his lower leg over Christmas 2004, the year he left Hollyoaks and began planning a move to LA. 

Both his mother, Jennifer, and his 28-year-old sister, Katie, urged him to have it checked by a doctor. He didn't do anything straight away and instead flew to LA in February, returning in May after finding it hard to get work. He then went on holiday to Marbella, by which time the patch of skin had turned black. 

As soon as he returned he saw his doctor in Hull and another in Kent. Andy, who today helps other actors relocate to LA through his business nextstoplax.com, was initially reassured when they both said he had nothing to worry about. 

But he insisted on seeing a dermatologist, and as soon as the specialist at Orpington Hospital, Kent, saw the growth he removed it for a biopsy. 

In early September, Andy was told he had malignant melanoma and an operation was set for October. 

'I was panicking,' says Andy. 'During the operation I told them about a spot on my other leg and insisted they remove the spot and test it. 

'I was shocked when I was told it was also a melanoma and that I needed a second operation. I began looking in the mirror every day and I just wanted every spot taken off my body.' 

According to Cancer Research, more than two-thirds of malignant melanomas are directly linked to too much UV light exposure. The risks are stronger for those who expose themselves intermittently. 

Melanoma is a cancer in the cells that produce pigmentation in the skin. UV radiation causes damage to their DNA, so the cells mutate, leading to a tumour. It is the most serious type of skin cancer because it can easily spread to the lymph nodes, get into the blood stream and pass to other organs of the body. 

The only cure is to catch the tumour early and remove it. 

After his second operation Andy returned to LA and began working in bars before landing a job as a narrator on the E! channel, but he also began drowning his worries and pursuing a hard partying lifestyle. 

'I think a lot of my problems came from dealing with all the anxiety and stress,' he says. 

'I was getting panic attacks and seeing a skin doctor whenever I thought I noticed something new. I still get checked twice a year at The Mole Clinic, but after no recurrences for a year I was given the all-clear and began to calm down. 

'LA is hot and even using factor 70 sun cream every day I still get a tan. I might use fake tanning products but I would never go anywhere near a sunbed now.'

 

Sunburn is damage to skin tissue caused by over-exposure to ultraviolet radiation (UVA and UVB rays) - usually the sun. UVB is absorbed by the outer layer of the skin (the epidermis, made up mostly of dead cells), which releases chemicals resulting in the swelling, pain and redness of sunburn. UVA passes through to the inner layer (the dermis, made of living tissue), damaging the DNA in these cells. Both UVA and UVB rays are known to increase the risk of skin cancer. 

Sunburn symptoms include red skin that is hot to the touch, pain and even blistering, fatigue and dizziness. In extreme cases, it can be life-threatening. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

