TITLE	Record 10,400 Britons hit by deadliest skin cancers

 By Daniel Martin Last updated at 1:39 AM on 26th May 2009

The number of people diagnosed with the deadliest form of skin cancer each year has topped 10,000. 

Binge tanning at home and on holiday abroad has contributed to the increase in malignant melanoma, according to figures issued by Cancer Research UK. 

Cases overall have risen by more than 650 in one year, taking the total to 10,410 in 2006 - the most recent figure available. 

Experts from the charity predict this number will rise to more than 15,500 by 2024, making malignant melanoma the fourth most common cancer among men and women. 

Rates of the deadly cancer have more than quadrupled in 30 years, from 3.4 cases per 100,000 people in 1977 to 14.7 per 100,000 in 2006. 

Women are more likely to be diagnosed than men - 5,600 are diagnosed each year compared with 4,800 men. 

   More... Using a sunbed has left me with permanent 'panda eyes' 

However, men are more likely to die from melanoma and rates among them have risen fivefold whereas in women they have more than tripled. 

The news has raised fresh fears about overuse of sunbeds by so called 'tanorexic' young women. 

The availability of cheap holidays to sunny locations is also thought to have contributed to the rise. 

Sara Hiom, Cancer Research UK's director of health information, said: 'With the rates of malignant melanoma in the UK rising faster than any other cancer, it's more important than ever that people are aware of the dangers of getting burnt, either in the sun or from using sunbeds. Most melanoma skin cancers are caused by over-exposure to UV rays given off by the sun and sunbeds. 

'But, crucially, if people are careful not to redden or burn, especially if they have fair, freckly or moley skin then most cases of malignant melanoma could be prevented. 

'We advise people to enjoy the sun safely by spending time in the shade in the middle of the day, covering up with appropriate cool clothing and sunglasses and applying sun cream of at least factor 15.' 

Last month the charity revealed that malignant melanoma had overtaken cervical cancer as the most commonly diagnosed cancer among women in their 20s. Almost every day, one woman aged 20 and 29 is diagnosed with skin cancer - making it twice as common as breast cancer. 

For woman in their 30s, melanoma is now the third most common cancer after breast and cervix tumours. 

Campaigners have slammed the Government for dragging its heels over plans to ban the use of sunbeds by under 18s. Studies show that regular sunbed use under the age of 30 raises melanoma risk by 75 per cent. 

Authorities have also failed to outlaw unstaffed, coin- operated tanning booths, which are thought to attract younger users and are around three times as powerful as a decade ago. 

A 20-minute visit to one of these booths is equivalent to spending a day at the beach. 

Estimates are that three million Britons regularly use sunbeds. 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

