TITLE	As research shows mouthwash contains TWICE the alcohol of wine, could you be gargling your way to cancer?

 By Peta Bee Last updated at 10:20 PM on 25th May 2009

 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

A glug of mouthwash is the best way to sweeten breath in the morning  -  well, that's what the Brits who spend £156million a year on it hope. 

And more are joining their ranks: Sales rose by nearly 10 per cent last year, according to market research company IRI. 

But are mouthwashes as effective, or as healthy, as they seem? 

Earlier this month, one well-known manufacturer was forced to recall thousands of bottles after they were found to have 'microbiological problems' that could cause chest infections. 

While investigations revealed this was related to a production rather than ingredient problem, it came hot on the heels of another, more worrying, revelation  -  that some mouthwashes may increase the risk of oral cancer. 

According to a report published in January in the Dental Journal of Australia, there was 'sufficient evidence' linking breath-freshening products containing alcohol with a higher risk of the disease. 

   More... The gene that links gum disease to heart problems 

Not only does alcohol seem to make the mouth's cells more vulnerable to cancer-causing agents, explained Professor Michael McCullough from Melbourne University, but 'its first breakdown product is acetaldehyde, a known human carcinogen'. 

While alcohol is mostly metabolised in the liver, the breakdown process actually begins in the mouth, so Professor McCullough recommends that such products should be available only on prescription for short-term use. 

Alcohol is added to mouthwash not to destroy bacteria but to act as a carrier agent for essential active ingredients such as menthol, eucalyptol and thymol which help to penetrate plaque. 

However, Professor McCullough, like many experts, is concerned that many of the best-selling brands contain high levels of alcohol. Some, such as Listerine, have as much as 26.9 per cent  -  more than double the amount in wine (12 per cent), which is known to raise the risk of oral and other cancers. 

Some mouthwashes are so strong that there have been cases of alcoholics becoming addicted to the products. But proponents argue there is no such risk because mouthwash is sloshed around the mouth rather than swallowed. 

'More than 30 published scientific studies have proven our product's safety and effectiveness,' says a spokesperson for the manufacturer of Listerine, Johnson  and  Johnson. 

But Dr Philip Stemmer, a dentist who runs the Fresh Breath Centre in London, says this theory does not hold. 'Labels of these products often advise to gargle for at least 30 seconds  -  far longer than a sip of alcohol stays in the mouth. That's quite a lot of exposure if you used it a couple of times a day.' 

Furthermore, alcohol could dry out the mouth and, in fact, make bad breath worse. By drawing moisture from the tissues and slowing down the production of saliva, Dr Stemmer claims that alcohol-containing mouthwashes leave limited fluid to flush away germs, meaning bacteria can multiply (it is a build-up of bacteria that can cause bad breath). 

However, not all mouthwashes contain alcohol, and many of the larger manufacturers produce alcohol-free alternatives, which are water-based. Most will freshen breath almost as well as regular mouthwash. 

But these are still not a cure for bad breath, says Dr Keith Cohen, director of the Dentexcel clinic on Harley Street. 

'A mouthwash may provide temporary improvement in the scent of your breath, but good dental hygiene with regular brushing and flossing is the only way to tackle it,' he says. 'If you are really concerned, see a dentist who will be able to eliminate the possible causes.' 

Food allergies can trigger the problem, and people with an intolerance to lactose often have bad breath because their digestive system cannot deal with protein. Other causes include sinus trouble, excess stomach acid, smoking, poor oral hygiene and a diet of strong-smelling or spicy foods.

 Brushing and flossing at least twice a day with a fluoride paste and unscented floss (so that you can tell which areas of your mouth give off the strongest odours and need more attention) are essential. Scraping the surface of your tongue can also help. 

'The good news is that most people are able to get rid of bad breath with the right advice,' says Dr Stemmer. 'But while mouthwash can provide temporary relief, it's definitely not a long-term solution.' 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

