TITLE	How to... get a safer tan

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 1:53 AM on 1st June 2009

 Comments (0) Add to My Stories 

If anything is likely to convince you to change your tanning habits, it's getting a picture of the damage you've already done to your skin. 

Start by getting your moles checked out, either by your GP or by one of the specialist services that are available around the country. 

'The first visible signs of melanoma are usually a new or changing mole in the top layer of the skin,' explains Vanessa Brown, a nurse practitioner at London's Mole Clinic. 

'Get your moles screened at least once, so you know which moles are normal and which should be watched or removed. If melanoma is caught early enough it's 100 per cent survivable, but if it's caught late there is rarely a cure.' 

Next, book in for a consultation with the Beau Visage imaging system (01223 265000, www.astronclinica.com) that looks up to 2mm beneath the skin's surface and can assess sun damage before it appears on the surface of the skin. 

'You can't undo any of the damage that you've caused up to this point, but you can make sure that you don't cause any more,' says Dr Mike Brown, Boots Suncare Scientific Adviser.

   More... Bits and pieces: The fascinating facts that will change your life this week Sandra Howard: 'I've been left wracked with guilt over my darling sister's death' 

'Tanning is a response to damage in your skin,' says Dr Brown. 'Unless you're wearing an SPF of 50+, UV light is still able to penetrate your skin and damage it. So, as a company, Boots does not recommend low SPF products, nor that you should deliberately seek a tan.' 

But if you are insistent on tanning, you need to choose an SPF that will protect your skin from burning, while allowing UV light through. SPF 15 is the minimum that you should be using, and pale-skinned people and children must sue at least SPF 30. 

The SPF number shows the level of protection that you get from UVB rays, but to ensure that you're also protected against UVA, examine the star system as well and aim for a minimum of four or five stars. 

Expensive products won't give you any more protection than the cheaper ones, as all products sold in the UK are tested in the same way. The more expensive ones might smell nicer or make your skin feel smoother, but shouldn't offer you any more protection.

 

'The biggest mistake that people make with suncream is not applying it generously enough,' says Dr Brown. 

'As a result, the protection we get is not as high as it might be. You should be using an amount the size of a £2 coin to cover the whole of one arm and hand. Most people use way less than this.' 

If you know you apply suncream sparingly, opt for a higher factor, as this will compensate for it. Always make sure that you reapply suncream regularly. Check the label, but it should normally be every couple of hours and after swimming. 

If you must sunbathe, try to limit your sun exposure and rather than spending all day prone on a lounger, restrict yourself to a couple of hours. Seek shade between 11am and 3pm.

No ifs, no buts, the facts are clear. Not only has it been shown that using sunbeds before the age of 35 increases your risk of developing melanoma, the most serious form of skin cancer, by up to 75 per cent, but sunbeds are estimated to cause around 100 deaths from melanoma every year in the UK. 

 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

