TITLE	Health news: How walnuts may help to prevent cancer, the benefits of running in water and a potential treatment for schizophrenia

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 8:27 AM on 2nd June 2009

In our pick of top health stories this week, a new study has found that walnuts may significantly lower the risk of breast cancer, a trial reveals running in water appears to reduce back pain and HRT patches are touted as a treatment for schizophrenia.

A diet rich in walnuts may significantly lower the risk of breast cancer. 

In a new study, mice that had been genetically engineered to develop breast cancer were fed with a normal diet and compared with those fed with a walnut-enriched diet. 

The mice fed with walnuts were less likely to develop tumours and if they did they were smaller and slower growing. 

The findings were presented at the American Association for Cancer Research. 

Walnuts have several components such as omega 3 fats, antioxidants, phytosterols and polyphenols that have been shown to reduce the risk or slow the growth of cancer in studies in the laboratory. 

More research is needed to see if this effect could be reproduced in humans. 

HRT patches could be an unlikely new treatment for schizophrenia. 

Research shows that people with a history of the mental illness have far fewer symptoms if they wear a hormone replacement patch on their skin. 

Around one in 100 people in the UK develops schizophrenia. Roughly 20 per cent will never suffer another episode, but most relapse within two years. 

The cause remains a mystery. However, those with a family history of schizophrenia are more at risk. 

   More... Health news: How apples help weight loss, the pine bark supplement for arthritis and light therapy for diabetics 

Current treatment usually involves powerful antipsychotic drugs, or psychological therapy. 

The study, in Australia, tested oestrogen skin patches in men and women with schizophrenia and in both groups there was a significant reduction in psychotic behaviour. 

Scientists think oestrogen has a protective effect on cells in the brain. 

Could running in deep water help ease lower back pain? 

In a new trial, patients who have had chronic back pain symptoms for three months, with no obvious cause, will undergo the therapy. 

It follows smaller studies where 90 per cent of patients felt their pain had been reduced after just six months. 

The trial, which is taking place over a 15-week period, will require patients to run in waist-deep water in a pool three times a week for 20-minute sessions. 

It is thought that running against the pressure of the water takes some of the load off the joints. 

The activity is also believed to strengthen abdominal, back and leg muscles, as well as stretching the back, hip, hamstrings and calf muscles - which helps reduce the pain, say the researchers at the University of Malaga in Spain. 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

