TITLE	Young men risk skin cancer by failing to protect themselves in the sun

 Last updated at 11:51 AM on 2nd July 2009

Young men are not doing enough to protect themselves from the dangerous effects of the sun, a report said today. 

While only 4% of girls between the ages of 16 and 24 are failing to apply suncream, more than a quarter of men (26%) in the same age group are not putting on sunblock. The study for the Teenage Cancer Trust and Superdrug, found 8% of boys admitted to not taking any action at all to reduce their risk of getting skin cancer. 

Researchers at nfpSynergy questioned 1,000 people over the age of 16 and found that only half of young people (53%) covered up when they were out in the sun and less than half (44%) of boys would wear sunglasses compared with two-thirds (63%) of girls.

Only a third (35%) of boys wore a sunhat, crucial for protecting sensitive areas such as the face and neck, compared with six out of 10 girls. 

Simon Davies, chief executive of the Teenage Cancer Trust, said: "It is encouraging to see from our research that 85% of young people say they use suncream to reduce their risk of skin cancer. 

"But there's obviously a need to educate young men and reduce the stigma attached to measures like wearing suncream and covering up." 

The charity is launching a Shunburn campaign today, supported by Superdrug, which aims to reach young people with important information on taking care in the sun and reducing the risk of skin cancer. 

Part of the campaign is a free text alert service for young people and messages will be sent on hot days, giving safety tips and reminders to wear suncream. 

Mr Davies added: "With weathermen predicting a hot summer and skin cancer rates rising in the UK, there has never been a greater need to show young people how to protect themselves when they're out in the sun. 

"As well as suncream, there are other important steps that all young people should be taking to avoid getting burnt. We hope that through our Shunburn campaign and with Superdrug's support we can let young people know that they can enjoy the sun and look after their skin at the same time."

   More... The rise of the 'minimoon' as couples save money on honeymoon break World's worst holiday experiences shared on new 'Titanic' travel website UK holiday inspiration: find articles here 

Shunburn is fronted by 19-year-old Annabel Banks who had a potentially dangerous mole removed from her neck after hearing a sun safety talk from the Teenage Cancer Trust's education team. 

In the campaign photos she demonstrates Shunburn's five sun safety steps - wear suncream, wear a hat, cover up, seek shade between 11am and 3pm and wear sunglasses. 

Martin Crisp, superintendent pharmacist at Superdrug, said: "It's a fact that the use of sun protection can cut the risk of skin cancer, this year alone we've seen visits to our mole clinics rise by a third as people are becoming more skin aware. "Through the Shunburn campaign we hope to show our customers just how important it is to be safe in the sun, and also how easy it is to have fun and enjoy the summer at the same time." 

The images of Annabel will be used to spread the sun safety message on leaflets, online and in Superdrug stores across the country. Superdrug will donate 50p to the Teenage Cancer Trust for every bottle of SPF50+ Solait sun lotion spray sold throughout the summer. 

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

