TITLE	Tanning salons

 By Daily Mail Reporter Last updated at 4:15 PM on 6th July 2009

Despite the health risks and danger of skin cancer associated with using sunbeds many tanning salons are providing 'shockingly poor standards of practice', a new report out today has found.

These include providing sunbeds that should only be used for medical reasons, poorly trained staff and no real restrictions on children or those at risk of skin cancer using sunbeds.

The study, which is being presented at the British Association of Dermatologists' (BAD) annual conference in Glasgow this week, revealed that more than one in four salons use 'type 4' equipment - sunbeds designed for treating skin conditions in hospital dermatology departments rather than cosmetic tanning.

It also found that the level of ultraviolet radiation emitted by the sunbeds was unknown in 62 per cent of salons while 39 per cent had sunbeds that were not regularly tested.

Too much UV can lead to burning and an increased risk of skin cancer.

The last time installations were inspected was unknown for over a third of premises, while almost one in five did not know who manufactured their sunbeds.

Guidance from the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) says sunbeds should not be used by children under the age of 18, although it is not currently illegal.

The results of the study showed that only half of salons checked the age of their clients and 71 per cent of those who allowed children to use sunbeds did not require an adult signature on the consent form.

Around one in six members of staff had not been given awareness training on checking age, the survey found.

Dr Art O'Hagan, the consultant dermatologist who led the study, said: 'Previous studies have shown poor comprehension of personal skin types, and relying on clients to have knowledge of their own skin type is an unsafe mode of skin type vetting.

'Furthermore, asking about skin types was a somewhat purposeless exercise, since only 44 per cent of customers with skin type 1 (people with very pale skin who are at greater risk of burning and skin cancer) were subsequently advised against using the sunbeds.

   More... Call to ban under 18s from sunbeds which kill 100 Britons a year Using a sunbed has left me with permanent 'panda eyes' I had to know if my breasts could kill me: TV presenter Dawn Porter's difficult journey 

'More shockingly, only 31 per cent of cases advised patients not to use a sunbed if they had a history of skin cancer.'

Ms Freeman added: 'This survey has shown that there is a serious lack of regulation within the sunbed industry and self regulation is clearly not working.

"Children are able to access sunbeds in a shockingly high number of salons, which is a real worry.

'This survey implies salons are not protecting their clients sufficiently. There is a great need for improved public education and strong regulation of sunbed salons to ensure that those who do choose to use sunbeds are fully aware of the risks.'

In one in five salons, staff did not discuss skin type with customers and it was left to the client to determine their own skin type in 13 per cent of cases.

The survey was of 332 tanning salons in Northern Ireland but BAD said the findings were likely to be replicated elsewhere.

BAD spokeswoman, Rebecca Freeman, said: 'Unfortunately, as the industry is entirely unregulated, there is nothing to indicate that the same issues could not be occurring in England as in Northern Ireland.

'The sunbed industry needs to be regulated throughout the UK, as this research highlights serious issues that could be putting people's health at risk.

'Some salons operate a policy of not admitting under-16s, but this is not enforced and is not consistent.

'Also, coin-operated sunbeds are widespread, including at gyms and leisure centres and there is nothing to stop children using these.'

The survey found that staff a quarter of salons had received no training on the risks of UV exposure.

A total of 39 per cent of salons had coin-operated sunbeds. HSE guidance states these should only be used under supervision by trained staff.

Other failings included 38 per cent of salons charging customers for goggles to protect their eyes and in more than 30 per cent of cases, the goggles did not meet European regulations on protection and did not carry the CE mark.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

