TITLE	Broccoli could keep cancer away

by ADAM POWELL, Daily Mail

A serving of broccoli every day can reduce the risk of colon cancer by almost 50 per cent, say researchers.

For years, doctors have recommended a high fibre diet as part of a healthy lifestyle.

Now scientists say some vegetables are much more beneficial than other sources of fibre.

In particular, leafy green vegetables such as broccoli, cauliflower, lettuce and sprouts are especially good at preventing bowel cancer.

Just one portion a day can lessen the chance of developing the disease by 46 per cent, according to the results of a sixyear study by scientists at the University of Liverpool.

The vegetables, called nonlegumes, contain fibre rich in galactose, a sugar which prevents cancer-causing proteins known as lectins from attaching themselves to the lining of the colon.

The findings, published in the journal Gastroenterology, could help save thousands of lives. Colon cancer kills around 18,000 people a year in the UK.

Professor John Rhodes, who led the study, said: 'Stories about the benefits of a high fibre diet that have been circulating for years have typically oversimplified the situation, so it is not surprising there has been confusion and contradictory reports.

'This latest study provides important evidence that the association between diet and colon cancer is because of specific food components rather than just a general effect of fibre.

'The study also confirms the harmful effects of too high a calorie and red meat intake in relation to colon cancer, while showing that regular exercise has protective effects.

'People should also note that if they avoid over-eating, consume a good quantity of leafy green vegetables and take regular exercise they can substantially reduce the risk of heart disease and diabetes.'

Professor Rhodes, a professor of medicine, and seven other scientists questioned 512 people on Merseyside and the Wirral suffering from bowel cancer, together with 512 healthy people of the same age, sex, postcode and using the same GP.

Researchers paid particular attention to the presence of galactose in the subjects' diets, and the information was analysed to produce the survey findings with the help of the North West Cancer Research Fund.

The study appears to confirm reports two years ago which first cast doubt on the health benefits of a high fibre diet.

Two U.S. studies examined the diets of 136,000 health workers over a 16-year period and found that eating fruit and vegetables had virtually no effect on the incidence of colon and rectal cancer.

However, such a diet did offer protection against heart disease, stroke, diabetes and other cancers.

Professor Rhodes added: 'It is becoming clear that fibre is not protecting against cancer by any simple mechanical action as it passes through the body.

'Its protection is down to the chemical compounds some fibres contain.'

The professor also noted that eating vegetables such as peas, beans, lentils - all legumes - and peanuts, which are high in lectins, can reduce the benefits of consuming leafy greens.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

