TITLE	How to MOT your man!

by ROSALIND RYAN, femail.co.uk

It may seem like your man moans more than you when he's ill, but in the health stakes he really is suffering.

The average male life expectancy is currently 75 and he can expect to be seriously or chronically ill for at least 15 years of his life.

Nearly 22,000 men are diagnosed with prostate cancer in Britain every year and cases of testicular cancer have doubled over the last two decades.

The state of men's health in the UK has now reached such dismal proportions that national charity, the Men's Health Forum, is calling on the government to introduce a new national policy to address the problem.

Peter Barker, director of the forum, says: 'The problem is that men are reluctant to ask for help when they have a problem. They prefer to worry about it in private. But when they do go to the doctors, the problem will be more advanced and harder to treat.'

To make sure your man does not leave things too late, femail.co.uk has found five quick and easy health checks you can carry out.

Each check should take no longer than five minutes, so you can give your man a complete health MOT in less than half an hour!

If your man is worried about his health he should make an appointment to see his GP for a complete health check to rule out any concerns.

1. Check his moles

You can check your man for signs of skin cancer by looking carefully at any moles on his back. If they have changed shape, size or colour, have ragged edges or are itching or bleeding, these could be the first signs of malignant melanoma.

Men are more likely to burn their backs

Make sure he fixes an appointment with his doctor within two weeks of noticing any changes in the moles.

Your man may be more at risk of skin cancer if there is a history of melanomas in his family, if he is often out in the sun without proper protection and if he does not tan easily and has freckles. To protect him in future, make sure he is wearing a sun cream with a protection factor of 15 or above and a four-star UVA rating.

'Men's health is not all prostate and testicles,' says Peter Barker, of the Men's Health Forum. 'The biggest killers of men are heart disease and cancer.'

Cancer Research UK, one of the UK's leading cancer research charities, has found that cases of the most serious form of skin cancer - malignant melanoma - in men have jumped by 12 per cent in the last six years. This rate of increase is six times higher than the number of cases for women.

Figures from the Men's Health Forum also show that men are twice as likely to die from skin cancer because they leave it too late before getting it treated.

Experts believe the reason so many men are suffering from skin cancer is because they are burning their skin in less noticeable places, most often on their back. Stripping off their shirts at the first sign of sunshine without proper protection is a prime culprit.

Skin cancer in women tends to occur on the lower leg where they are spotted more easily. This means treatment can be sought as quickly as possible. But because men are burning in places they cannot see, their rates of skin cancer are booming.

To find out more about sun creams, click in the blue box above for our sun cream calculator.

Now follow the links below to find out how to check for heart disease and different forms of cancer.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

