TITLE	Can a vegetable cure cancer?

by ANGELA DOWDEN, Daily Mail

We all know that vegetables are good for us - but some are better than others.

A diet rich in leafy green vegetables, for example, can almost halve the risk of colon cancer, scientists at Liverpool University reported recently.

Here, femail.co.uk lists ten of the top 'super veg' - along with the ailments they can heal or prevent.

BROCCOLI

Protects against: Colon cancer, breast cancer

According to research at Liverpool University, broccoli and other leafy greens contain a fibre rich in the sugar galactose, which could help prevent proteins called lectins from binding to the lining of the colon and causing damage.

Broccoli and other cruciferous family vegetables are also rich in indole compounds - plant chemicals which seem to modify oestrogen metabolism, decreasing the risk of breast cancer. Two out of three studies examining the relationship between breast cancer and cruciferous vegetables found that high consumption decreased the risk by 40pc.

A compound called sulphorophane in broccoli also stimulates the production of liver enzymes which destroy cancercausing chemicals.

TOMATOES

Protect against: Cancer, heart disease

One of the main active ingredients in tomatoes is the phytochemical lycopene, which fights free radicals that can cause cancer.

According to a review in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, people who eat a lot of tomato-based foods can reduce their risk of developing various cancers by 40pc.

The evidence for tomatoes' beneficial effect is strongest for cancers of the prostate, lung and stomach, but it can also be shown for the colon, pancreas, oesophagus, oral cavity, breast and cervix.

Processing tomatoes into ketchup, puree or sauce increases the availability of lycopene by softening tough plant cell walls.

Research studying more than 1,000 U.S. and European men found those with the highest levels of lycopene were about half as likely to have had a heart attack.

CABBAGE

Protects against: Stomach ulcers, colon cancer, breast cancer

Cabbage is claimed to ease stomach ulcers due to the presence of glutamine and of s-methylmethionine.

The folk remedy is to drink a couple of pints of cabbage juice a day, but freshly made cabbage soup is a far more palatable alternative. As a member of the cruciferous family of vegetables, cabbage is also likely to prevent colon cancer and breast cancer.

One U.S. study showed people who ate cabbage more than once a week reduced their chance of contracting bowel cancer by twothirds, though other studies haven't shown such conclusive results.

BRUSSELS SPROUTS

Protect against: Cancer, birth defects, heart disease

Another member of the cruciferous vegetable family,

Brussels sprouts contain the potent anticancer compound sinigrin which ' persuades' pre-cancerous cells to commit suicide - a natural process called apoptosis.

According to scientists at the Institute of Food Research in Norwich, the effect is so powerful that even the occasional meal of sprouts can destroy these cells.

Unfortunately for sprouthaters, the milder the sprout, the less potent the anticancer effect.

However, all sprouts are an excellent source of folate (the food form of folic aid) and can help reduce the risk of birth defects if eaten prior to and during pregnancy. Folate also reduces levels of a heart disease risk factor in the blood called homocysteine.

SPINACH

Protects against: Cataracts and macular degeneration

Two antioxidants in spinach - lutein and zeaxanthin - seem to protect against age- related eye diseases, including cataracts as well as macular degeneration.

It is thought the two phytochemicals - found in concentrated amounts in the retina - neutralise harmful free radicals generated in the eye through sun exposure.

In one American study, people who ate spinach 5-6 times a week had an 86pc lower risk of having advanced macular degeneration.

Curly kale is also rich in lutein and zeaxanthin.

WATERCRESS

Protects against: Osteoporosis, anaemia, fibroids

Eating 75g of watercress provides 16 pc of the recommended daily allowance (RDA) for calcium and 12 pc of the RDA for iron, helping to prevent osteoporosis and anaemia.

Women who eat lots of watercress and other green vegetables also have a lower chance of being diagnosed with fibroids (benign growths on the womb), according to researchers in Italy, though the reason why is not clear.

ONIONS AND GARLIC

Protect against: High cholesterol, heart attack, hay fever, cancer, inflammation

The sulphur compounds in garlic

mean that a regular intake can help lower cholesterol levels and reduce blood clotting.

In a study at Newcastle's Royal Victoria Infirmary, onions eaten with a breakfast fry-up reversed the normal tendency of the blood to clot after a fatty meal. Garlic also displays immune-boosting, anti-bacterial, decongestive and anti-cancer properties. A recent study of women in Iowa, U.S., found that those who ate garlic more than once a week were only half as likely as non-garlic eaters to develop colon cancer.

Yellow, and especially red (but not white), onions provide very high levels of quercetin, an antioxidant of the flavonoid family.

Quercetin is believed to help quell inflammation (for example of the joints) and allergic reactions (for example hay fever), as well as reduce the incidence of heart attacks.

Frying onions does not reduce their quercetin content.

CARROTS

Protect against: Poor night vision, colds, cancer

Carrots are the richest single source of beta carotene, which has an immune-stimulating and anti-cancer effect - probably through mopping up excess free radicals which cause cell mutation.

Beta carotene can also be converted into vitamin A, essential for the eyes to see in dim light. Vitamin A also helps to keep the mucus passages in the mouth, nose and throat healthy, decreasing the risk of catching colds and flu.

RED PEPPERS

Protect against: Colds, cancer

Red peppers are a rich source of vitamin C and beta carotene - boosting the immune system and protecting against everything-from colds to cancer.

To increase their effect, eat them cooked or chargrilled. Heat softens the peppers' cell walls, allowing more of the beta carotene to be released.

SHIITAKE MUSHROOMS

Protect against: Cancer, liver disease, infection

These contain immuneboosting lentinan, which is used as an anti-cancer drug in Japan.

In studies, lentinan has been shown to reduce the rate at which tumours spread and to improve symptoms in hepatitis B patients.

The benefit is thought to come from lentinan's ability to stimulate white blood cells called T-lymphocytes.

A Japanese study found that a shiitake mushroom extract slowed the immune system's deterioration in HIV patients.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

