TITLE	Claims over new breast cancer drug

A new breast cancer wonder-drug could potentially prevent or delay up to 80% of tumours in most high risk post-menopausal women, it was claimed today.

Anastrozole has been hailed as the biggest step forward in breast cancer treatment for 20 years.

Results of the biggest ever international study on breast cancer show that the drug is more effective than the current "gold standard" treatment, tamoxifen, and produces far fewer side effects.

The drug, marketed as Arimidex, hit the headlines a month ago when news of the trial findings was presented at a conference in Florida.

Today the full results of the study were published in the Lancet medical journal.

More than 9,000 post-menopausal women from 21 countries who had undergone surgery for breast cancer took part.

The findings showed that three year disease-free survival was 2% greater among women given anastrozole compared with those treated with tamoxifen.

While tamoxifen reduced the risk of a new tumour appearing in the unaffected breast - contralateral breast cancer - by 50%, anastrozole given alone slashed it by up to 80%.

Tamoxifen carries a small but significant risk of causing cancer of the womb lining. This risk was much lower with anastrozole, which also caused less vaginal bleeding, stroke and blood clots, and hot flushes.

But women taking anastrozole were much more likely to suffer osteoporosis and bone fractures.

The trial was led by Professor Michael Baum, based at the Cancer Research UK and University College London Cancer Trials Centre in London.

Senior lecturer Joan Houghton, a member of the Trials Centre team, said: "The ATAC trial treated women with existing breast cancer, but we found a reduction in contralateral breast cancer.

Therefore there is the suggestion that anastrozole would also be a good drug to use as a preventative agent, especially as side effects are reduced."

Epidemiologist Dr Jack Cuzick, who analysed the study data, is now leading a new trial run by Cancer Research UK into cancer prevention.

He said: "The results of this study provide great encouragement for evaluating this new drug in post-menopausal women at high risk of developing breast cancer."

Professor Gordon McVie, director general of Cancer Research UK, said: "Trials have already shown that tamoxifen can cut down the risk of breast cancer but there were some concerns about the side effects. Prevention is better than cure and Arimidex is a drug that promises to do better on both prevention and side effects."

Anastrozole is currently only licensed to treat advanced cancer in the UK.

In light of the trial results, it might now become available for women with early breast cancer by the end of the year.

About 38,000 women are diagnosed as having breast cancer in the UK each year and 13,000 die from the disease.

But the death rate has fallen by 22% in the last 10 years, largely due to better treatment and breast screening. The lifetime risk of getting breast cancer is one in nine for women.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

