TITLE	GM super tomatoes boost cancer battle

By JAMES CHAPMAN, Daily Mail

Scientists have long known that a diet rich in tomatoes can have major health benefits.

But now they have created a 'super-tomato' that can help give vastly improved protection against prostate cancer and other forms of the disease.

The genetically engineered fruit is packed with three and a half times more of the antioxidant lycopene than usual.

As well as giving the tomatoes their distinctive red colouring, lycopene is an active cancer fighting substance.

One study of 50,000 men found that eating ten or more servings of tomato sauce or tomatoes a week reduced prostate cancer risk by almost half.

And earlier this month, findings were unveiled suggesting that lycopene could also help protect against breast cancer and osteoporosis.

Creation of the new extra-strong GM version was a 'happy accident', say researchers at Purdue University in Indiana and the U.S. Department of Agriculture.

They had been working together to manufacture tomatoes for food processing that were of higher quality and would ripen later.

Professor Avtar Handa, of the university's horticulture department, said: 'We were pleasantly surprised to find the increase in lycopene.'

He added: 'This is one of the first examples of increasing the nutritional value of food through biotechnology. In fact, it may be the first example of using biotechnology to increase the nutritional value of a fruit.'

To develop the tomato, the scientists inserted a gene derived from yeast into tomato plants.

That gene was fused to another which ensured it was only switched on in the fruits of the plants.

The yeast gene produced an enzyme that affected the production of substances called polyamines which control the way the fruits grow.

Dr Handa added: 'We are excited by this approach, because it results in an increase in lycopene in tomato, and because we think this approach could be used to increase the phytonutrient content of other fruits and vegetables.'

Co-researcher Dr Autar Mattoo, who is head of the U.S. department of agriculture's vegetable laboratory, claimed the amount of extra lycopene found in the genetically engineered tomatoes is dramatic.

'The lycopene levels increased two to 3.5 times compared to the non-engineered tomatoes,' he said.

Dr Mattoo said: 'A traditional breeding approach can require ten to 15 years to release a new tomato variety. This time can be cut to less than half using biotechnology.'

Dr Handa argued that the results showed that GM technology could be used to benefit health positively.

Opponents of GM technology, however, warn that tampering with the genetic makeup of food crops could damage human health over the long term. They say researchers should be looking for different solutions.

Consumer resistance to GM foods means the super tomato is unlikely to make it on to supermarket shelves for several years.

'The public's confidence in food safety is too important to compromise,' said John Radin of the U.S. department of agriculture.

'This type of product, however, represents the next generation of genetically engineered foods. It will bring to the consumer's table important benefits that could not have been achieved using traditional breeding programmes.'

The tomato scientists, whose research is reported in the journal Nature Biotechnology this month, have filed for a patent on the GM product.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

