TITLE	Aspirin may be the breakthrough in war on lung cancer

by BEEZY MARSH, Daily Mail

Aspirin could be a powerful weapon against Britain's biggest cancer killer, experts said yesterday.

A U.S. study found that the painkiller can help cut the chance of developing the most common form of lung cancer by more than 50 per cent.

The risk of getting any form of the disease, which claims around 37,000 lives in Britain every year, was reduced by up to a third by regularly taking aspirin.

The news is the latest in a string of discoveries about the health benefits of aspirin, which was invented more than 100 years ago.

It is already taken daily by more than two million angina sufferers and heart attack survivors in the UK to protect against further attacks and against strokes. Thousands more take it to ward off heart disease.

Many arthritis sufferers also benefit from aspirin's painkilling properties and there are indications that it can give some protection against stomach cancer, even though it can also cause irritation of the stomach lining.

The latest study, published in the British Journal of Cancer, is the first evidence that aspirin can keep lung cancer at bay, even among smokers.

Experts from New York University School of Medicine questioned more than 14,000 women about long-term aspirin use.

They then compared those who went on to develop lung cancer with those who stayed in good health, and attempted to relate aspirin use to the chances of developing the disease.

They found that taking aspirin three or more times a week for at least six months was enough to reduce the risk of developing any form of lung cancer by a third.

The reduction was even greater for a form called nonsmall cell lung cancer, which accounts for about threequarters of all deaths. Regular aspirin users were less than half as likely to develop this form.

The researchers found that a history of smoking, which causes 90 per cent of lung cancers, was by far the biggest risk factor. But even among women in that group, regular doses of aspirin could cut the danger.

Although the study looked only at women, experts from Cancer Research UK, which publishes the British Journal of Cancer, said there was no reason to expect the results would not be repeated in men.

However, the charity warned that the study did not look into the dosage of aspirin. There are also concerns that, because the drug is very cheap and widely available over the counter, people may start self-medicating in the hope of avoiding lung cancer.

Survival rates for lung cancer in the UK are poor, with only around five per cent of sufferers still alive five years after diagnosis.

But a spokesman for Cancer Research UK said no one should start taking regular aspirin without consulting their GP because some people can suffer irritation of the stomach lining.

This can lead to bleeding and ulcers, although some aspirin preparations now have a special chemical to help protect the delicate gastric lining.

Scientists do not know exactly why aspirin seems to protect against some cancers but its anti-inflammatory properties are being investigated.

The Cancer Research UK spokesman said: 'There is increasing evidence that molecules involved in the body's inflammatory response may also contribute to the development of the disease.'

Professor Gordon McVie, director general of Cancer Research UK, said: 'Aspirin is a remarkable drug with a wide range of health benefits, and this is the latest evidence to suggest it could become a useful weapon against cancer.

'But as much as these results are encouraging, people shouldn't fool themselves into thinking that taking aspirin somehow counteracts the dangers of smoking.

' Everything else pales into insignificance compared with the lethal effects of tobacco.'

A second study in the British Journal of Cancer predicts that the UK's lung cancer death toll will fall over the next five years as more people stop smoking.

Researchers who used World Health Organisation mortality figures for 20 European countries said deaths among men under 75 would decrease by one in five. Among under-55s, they predicted decreases of 26 per cent in men and 15 per cent in women.

Facts about aspirin

1. Aspirin is the common name for acetylsalicylic acid - a painkiller which can be traced back to Greek times.

2. Hippocrates, the father of modern medicine, used it in the fifth century BC to relieve the pain of childbirth and the aches produced by fevers. He used potions made from the leaves and bark of willow, which contain the chemical salicin.

3. The Romans also used willow, as did English clergymen in the 1750s.

4. In the 19th century, scientists developed medicines based on salicin - salicylic acid and sodium salicylate. But they were not popular, as they tended to irritate the stomach.

5. In 1897, German chemist Felix Hoffman tried to concoct a less acidic formula to ease his father's arthritis.

6. The result, aspirin, was first marketed in Germany - it was the first drug sold in water-soluble tablets - and rapidly became popular everywhere.

7. An estimated one trillion tablets have now been swallowed around the globe. Britons are thought to consume around five tons of aspirin every day, and the drug can be found in most homes.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

