TITLE	Is aspirin really a miracle cure?

by NAOMI COLEMAN, femail.co.uk

A new study claims aspirin could be a powerful weapon against lung cancer - Britain's second most common cancer.

Taking three pills a week could halve our chances of developing the disease, it says.

Aspirin is the common name for acetylsalicylic acid - a painkiller which can be traced back to Greek times.

It is an established treatment for heart disease patients because it makes blood less 'sticky', helping to prevent the formation of blood clots in the artery which can lead to a heart attack.

Because of this it is already taken daily by more than two million angina sufferers in the UK to protect against further attacks and against strokes. Thousands more take it to ward off heart disease.

But this latest research is just one of a flurry of studies in the past few years which have claimed that the drug may also help treat other serious illnesses - including prostate cancer, heart disease, deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and bowel cancer.

So is aspirin a wonder drug that we should all be taking every day to ward of potential illnesses?

Doctors warn that long-term or high dosage use of aspirin can, in rare cases, cause irritation to the stomach lining, stomach ulcers and bleeding. For this reason you should always consult your GP before taking the drug on a regular basis.

They also claim that much more research is needed to back up the claims made for the drug in recent studies. This is because many of the studies so far are epidemiological research - questionnaires on lifestyle and habits - rather than clinical trials.

Clinical trials involve hundreds of patients taking the drug or a placebo over a number of years which is the only way to prove that a drug really works.

So is aspirin the new miracle cure?

Here, femail.co.uk looks at five serious conditions associated with the treatment of aspirin and gets the verdicts of leading doctors.

LUNG CANCER What is it? Lung cancer is the second most common cancer in the UK. In most people it is related to cigarette smoking, although some people who have never smoked get lung cancer. About 35,000 people die of lung cancer in the UK each year.

What is the evidence that aspirin can help? New evidence from America claims aspirin could be the latest weapon against lung cancer. Scientists from New York University School of Medicine claim that the painkiller could cut the chance of developing lung cancer by 50 per cent.

The study, published in the British Journal of Cancer, is the first evidence to suggest that aspirin can keep lung cancer at bay - even among smokers. Researchers questioned more than 14,000 women about long-term aspirin use. They compared those who went on to develop lung cancer with those who stayed in good health.

The researchers found that taking aspirin three or more times a week for at least six months was enough to reduce the risk of developing lung cancer by a third.

What doctors say: Dr Joe Neary, chairman of the clinical network at the Royal College of GPs, says more studies need to be done before doctors will start prescribing aspirin to protect against lung cancer.: 'Although there is some early evidence to suggest aspirin can help to protect against lung cancer in high risk patients, we need further clinical trials - rather than epidemiological studies based on questionnaires - to prove that the benefits of aspirin outweigh the potential health risks of taking aspirin which include stomach ulcers and stomach bleeding.'

'On the basis of this study no doctor would prescribe aspirin as a treatment for lung cancer. Instead they would look at patients' lifestyles and encourage them to give up smoking and take up more exercise,' he says. 

HEART DISEASE 

Heart disease is the result of the formation of a blood clot in the coronary artery which obstructs the flow of blood to the heart which can lead to heart failure. More than two million people in the UK suffer from the heart condition angina - the most common symptom of coronary heart disease. 

What's the evidence that aspirin can help? There is strong clinical evidence to show that aspirin thins the blood, making blood cells known as platelets less sticky and less likely to bind together into life-threatening clots. Research shows aspirin reduces deaths in high-risk patients by 27 per cent.

What doctors say Dr Joe Neary says: 'A low dose of aspirin a day (one small tablet or 75-100mg) is proven to help prevent heart attacks in high-risk patients - or those who have already suffered a heart attack.'

'But I would never recommend that aspirin be used as a preventative measure by healthy people. Regular use of aspirin over several years can cause long-term irritation to the stomach and the intestine which - in rare cases - can be quite serious.'

Always consult your GP to assess if you should be taking aspirin regularly. 

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

