TITLE	Chips may cause cancer

By JAMES CHAPMAN, Daily Mail

The world's senior food safety expert last night urged people to cut down on fried products such as chips and crisps after scientists confirmed they can contain high levels of a chemical linked to cancer.

Dr Jorgen Schlundt said there was 'major concern' over the detection of acrylamide at alarming levels in staple products eaten by millions every day.

Dr Schlundt, the World Health Organisation's head of food safety, said after an

emergency meeting in Geneva that teams of scientists in Britain, Sweden, Norway, Germany and Switzerland had confirmed the findings.

They have detected acrylamide in foods such as fried potatoes, crisps, crispbreads and breakfast cereals. Levels appear to be highest in foods that have been cooked at high temperatures for long periods.

The substance has long been linked to many different forms of cancer, nerve damage and infertility but until April this year experts had no idea that it could produced by cooking.

The 25 experts from universities and food safety authorities around the world who gathered for the three- day talks said further tests on different types of food were now urgently needed.

Scientists, manufacturers and food safety bodies had to co- operate to find ways of lowering acrylamide levels.

'It is likely that this is causing cancer in the human population,' said Dr Schlundt. 'It is a genotoxic substance, which means it goes into the genes and changes something, and causes cancer. This is something that people will get in their food all the time, over the whole of their lives.'

Dr Schlundt added that he believed a 'significant' proportion of the 30 to 40 per cent of all cancer cases thought to be linked to diet might be caused by acrylamide.

'You should not have a picture that if you eat something once that has acrylamide then you will get cancer tomorrow. The longer you eat it, the greater the risk,' he said.

Dieter Arnold, a scientist with Germany's Federal Institute of Health Protection for Consumers, who chaired the WHO meeting, said: 'We need to do research quite urgently in order to be able to reduce the levels of acrylamide in food.' He said that at this stage, there were no plans to single out specific brands of food which should be avoided. 'People should eat a balanced and varied diet which includes plenty of fruit and vegetables and that they should moderate consumption of fried and fatty foods.'

Acrylamide in food appears to be produced naturally as a result of baking or frying. It is also likely to be produced by grilling and roasting.

Early experiments suggest that boiling does not increase levels of the chemical.

In industry, it is used in the production of gels called polyacrylamides. These are used in water treatment and in manufacturing paper. Other uses include as a soil conditioning agent, and as a grout-ing agent in the construction of dams, tunnels and sewers. On the basis of animal experiments, acrylamide is considered a 'probable' human carcinogen. Exposure to the chemical in the workplace is also known to cause nerve damage. In studies on male animals, it has also been shown to impair fertility.

The Food Standards Agency in Britain was prompted to investigate levels of acrylamide after Swedish scientists claimed in April to have discovered that frying and baking created potentially dangerous amounts.

There are strict European rules on the amount of acrylamide allowed in food packaging - no more than ten parts per billion.

But the FSA study found found 310 parts per billion of acrylamide in potatoes after they were chipped and fried.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

