TITLE	Can aspirin really work wonders?

by NAOMI COLEMAN, femail.co.uk

Most of us grab an aspirin as a quick-fix way to treat migraines or period pain. But a string of studies show that this household painkiller could cure more serious illnesses from prostate and bowel cancer to deep vein thrombosis.

Here, we look at three more diseases and investigate whether aspirin can really treat them

BOWEL CANCER 

Bowel cancer is the third most common cancer in the UK and kills more than 19,000 people a year in Britain. Although the cause of the disease is largely unknown, it is thought that benign polyps - small growths - can develop in the bowel and lead to cancer.

What's the evidence that aspirin can help? Early studies show some promise that aspirin can significantly reduce the incidence of bowel cancer. Tests by doctors working for the Cancer Research Campaign in Bristol have found that aspirin makes cancer cells from the large bowel self-destruct.

The tests revealed that aspirin is most effective against cells from advanced tumours and could reduce the risk of large bowel cancer by up to 50 per cent.

No one knows how the drug protects against these cancers but it is possible that it may reduce the high level of hormones called prostaglandins which are typically found in tissue where cancer occurs.

What doctors say: Dr Jo Neary, chairman of the clinical network of the Royal College of GPs, says more research is still needed before the drug is prescribed as a preventative treatment: 'Although there is some promising evidence to show that aspirin can help some people, this painkiller is not prescribed for bowel cancer because more research is needed.'

DEEP VEIN THROMBOSIS (DVT) 

DVT is a blood clot which may form in a patient's vein (the blood vessel that carries blood towards the heart) - and then moves to the heart or lungs. The condition can be triggered by lack of movement on long-haul flights. Because of the lack of movement blood platelets begin to stick together and eventually form a clot.

What's the evidence that aspirin can help? It is already established that aspirin can reduce the stickiness of our blood and help prevent blood clots from forming in our veins.

There is also some evidence to show that aspirin can help cut the chances of DVT from happening again in some patients. Studies show aspirin helped prevent DVT from forming in one third of people who had already suffered from a blood clot.

Although it's not yet been proven that aspirin can help healthy people travelling on long-haul flights, doctors claim it is likely to help.

What doctors say; Dr Eric Watts, a haematologist from Basildon Hospital says: 'Although more research is needed, taking one junior aspirin (75mg) before a long-haul flight could possibly help prevent DVT together with regular leg exercises. However, I would not recommend aspirin to people who have a history of stomach ulcers. It is not necessary to take another aspirin during the flight, because the effects last for several days,' he says.

PROSTATE CANCER What is it? Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer in men and every hour in the UK one man dies of the disease. There are more than 21,000 cases reported each year and about 10,000 deaths.

Cancer of the prostate tends to affect older men over the age of 50. Symptoms may be mild and occur over many years spreading to the back, hips and pelvis. 

What's the evidence that aspirin can help? A recent American study exploring the link between aspirin and prostate cancer found fewer men developed the disease when taking painkillers such as aspirin.

The researchers from the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota looked at 1,362 men aged 60-plus over five years. They found four per cent of men who took aspirin and ibuprofen - a derivative of aspirin -developed prostate cancer compared with nine per cent of those who were not treated with the painkiller.

What doctors say: Dr Joe Neary says 'Until there is solid evidence in the form of clinical trials that proves that taking aspirin regularly is going to benefit prostate cancer, we would not prescribe it.'

Children under 14-years-old, pregnant women and people who have stomach ulcers or allergies to aspirin should avoid taking the painkiller. Always check with your GP before taking aspirin on a regular basis over a long period of time. 

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

