TITLE	Calls for cancer tests for troops

Pressure was today mounting on the Government to screen soldiers who served in the Balkans war for cancer after the UN said it had found radiation at eight sites in Kosovo hit by Nato ammunition.

The UN Environment Programme, based in Geneva, said that its preliminary findings called for precautions to be taken when dealing with ammunition containing depleted uranium.

The Ministry of Defence, which has known about the risks of depleted uranium weapons at least since the Gulf War 10 years ago, today insisted the risks were minimal to personnel.

A spokesman said Defence Minister John Spellar had told the Commons in a written answer last November, that the ministry was aware early in the 1990-1 conflict that oxide dust from the weapons did pose a limited health risk.

Today's Daily Telegraph said that a warning had been signalled to the HQ British Forces in Riyadh in February, 1991 pointing out the likely risks.

The MoD spokesman said Mr Spellar had admitted that tank crews and other personnel had apparently not been issued with such advice, when other units were.

Analysis of depleted uranium samples collected in Kosovo to determine if there is any health or environmental risk was today continuing, the UN said.

Exposure to the uranium has led to the emergence of a "Balkan War syndrome", some servicemen claim.

Former British Army engineer Kevin Rudland has said his medical condition and the deaths of six Italian soldiers may be linked to the use of depleted uranium in cannon shells fired during the air strikes of 1999.

Mr Rudland, 41, from Hull, served in the Territorial Army for 18 years and in the regular Army in Bosnia for just six months before returning home and setting up his own business as an engineer.

Within a few months of his coming back in April 1999 the married father-of-three's hair fell out, he began to suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder, his teeth started to rot and he suffered from osteoarthritis.

His symptoms have not improved since then and he now sees a psychiatrist for psychological problems caused by his illness, which he said had made him "unemployable".

Mr Rudland said: "These UN findings do not surprise me. This is what we are trying to get over to the Government.

"They should screen British soldiers to find out if they were contaminated, so it can be sorted out, if they were. Civilian doctors don't know the symptoms we are suffering from - they don't recognise them."

A UNEP field mission in November visited 11 of the 112 sites identified by Nato as having been targeted by ordnance containing depleted uranium during the aerial bombardment of Kosovo.

It collected soil, water and vegetation samples and also conducted tests on buildings and destroyed vehicles.

"At eight sites, the team found either slightly higher amounts of Beta-radiation immediately at or around the holes left by depleted uranium ammunition, or pieces and remnants of ammunition, such as sabots and penetrators," Pekka Haavisto, the chairman of the assessment team, said in a statement.

"It was surprising to find remnants of depleted uranium ammunition just lying on the ground, one-and-a-half years after the conflict. Also, the ground directly beneath the ammunition was slightly contaminated," he added.

"For this reason, we paid special attention to the risks that uranium toxicity might pose to the ground waters around the sites."

The samples taken are being analysed in Sweden, Switzerland, Britain, Austria and Italy. UNEP said it expected to have the results in early March.

The agency has advised that precautions be taken when handling ammunition found at the sites where depleted uranium was used.

The European Union has announced it will conduct an inquiry into possible health risks from the shells, which were fired from American planes.

And the Italian government began its own investigation after the deaths of six Italian soldiers and 30 cases of serious illnesses among others who served in Kosovo and Bosnia.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

