TITLE	Alternative treatments

by CHARLOTTE HARDING, femail.co.uk

Until the definitive cure for cancer is found it it is likely interest in alternative treatments will continue to grow.

But with official information on non-traditional therapies often limited, and time always of the essence, how do you start to explore the possible opportunities and discern between legitimate treatments and expensive, time-wasting quacks?

Here, we explain what the treatments claim to do, the research to date and how you can get hold of them.

The most important thing to know if you are considering seeking non-traditional treatment for cancer is the difference between complementary and alternative treatments.

Complementary therapies are those offered in addition to traditional forms of cancer treatments and are now widely available in hospitals, hospices and cancer clinics up and down the country. These treatments do not make claims to cure cancer, but rather to offer emotional and physical relief and support.

Alternative therapies are the range of treatments which often make claims to cure cancer and which are sometimes used instead of traditional cancer treatments. These are not widely available in the UK and while many doctors respect patients' wishes to find out more about these treatments they are not generally recommended by traditional medics because of a lack of supporting medical evidence.

Dr Michelle Kohn, a doctor who specialises in complementary therapies for the treatment of cancer and an advisor to Macmillan Cancer Relief, says complementary treatments - usually touch and talk treatments such as aromatherapy, massage and reflexology - are now very much an accepted part of the treatment of cancer patients.

'There has been a major shift in attitudes towards the use of complementary therapies as part of cancer care,' says Dr Kohn. 'They are now very much an accepted part of cancer treatment.'

Click on the links at the bottom of the page for our guide to complementary cancer therapies.

By contrast, while many doctors respect their patients' right to consider all the options for treatment, alternative treatments are still mostly treated with caution by traditional doctors because there is as yet no hard clinical evidence that they work - and many doctors believe there is the potential for harm.

'Cancer leaves people very vulnerable and very much seeking anything else that might work,' says Dr Kohn.

'Unfortunately some of the alternative products are sold by people who make patients believe that this is the cure and our concern is that these treatments should be put through clinical trials before claims are made about them. There is always a risk that some alternative treatments may be toxic for people and end up doing them more harm than good.'

Despite this much work is under way in America into alternative cancer treatments. 'There are credible people researching this area in America,' says Dr Kohn. 'But we are still several years away from getting definitive clinical reports on alternative treatments.'

'People get carried away by anecdotal evidence, but serious research takes many years. What we need to do is get a delicate balance between giving patients choice and offering them responsible treatments.'

Click on the links below to read our guides to both complementary and alternative therapies for cancer.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

