TITLE	Cancer: the fruit and vegetables to eat

by NAOMI COLEMAN, femail.co.uk

According to Cancer Research UK most people in Britain eat an average of two to three portions of fruit and vegetables a day.

But dietitians say consuming at least five servings a day can help build up our body's immunity and protect us from cancer.

Here, we look why certain fruit and vegetables are particularly good at protecting us against cancer.

FRUIT AND VEGETABLES Early findings by the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) - which tested a total of 400,000 people in nine countries about their diet and lifestyle - last year found that eating five or more servings of fruit and vegetables each day can reduce our risk of cancer by at least 25 per cent.

Professor Kaytee Chaw of EPIC says: 'Although there is no conclusive evidence to prove that one fruit or vegetable can protect against cancer, it is well established that a variety of fruit and vegetables can protect against certain cancers.'

Fruit and vegetables are thought to be particularly good at protecting against cancer because they are rich in antioxidants - substances from our food that fight off cancer-causing molecules.

'This means the more antioxidants we consume, the fewer toxins we have in our body because it is equipped to fight them off,' she says.

Tenderstem Tenderstem, a hybrid of broccoli and Chinese kale is thought to help prevent stomach, colon and lung cancers. Its creators say it is rich in glucosinolates, an important anti-cancer agent that also gives broccoli and Brussels sprouts their distinctive smell.

In fact, tenderstem contains 45 per cent more glucosinolates than common types of broccoli, according to tests. One of the compounds involved, sinigrin, is said to persuade pre-cancerous cells to commit suicide. Tenderstem, which looks like broccoli with a longer stem, is available at Marks  and  Spencer, Waitrose and some Sainsbury's stores.

Broccoli Some research has shown that a serving of broccoli every day can reduce the risk of colon cancer by almost 50 per cent.

According to research at Liverpool University, broccoli and other leafy greens contain a fibre rich in the sugar galactose, which could help prevent proteins called lectins from binding to the lining of the colon, and so decrease our risk of colonic cancer.

Broccoli and other green leafy vegetables such as cauliflower, lettuce and sprouts are are also rich in indole compounds - plant chemicals which seem to modify oestrogen metabolism, decreasing the risk of breast cancer.

Two out of three studies examining the relationship between breast cancer and green leafy vegetables found that high consumption decreased the risk of breast cancer by 40 per cent.

However, dieticians warn it is important to eat a variety of fruit and vegetables - including different colours in your food - as it's the interaction of different chemicals found in a variety of fruit and veg that build up immunity.

Cabbage Some scientists think cabbage is particularly good at protecting against colon cancer and breast cancer.

One American study showed people who ate cabbage more than once a week reduced their chance of contracting bowel cancer by two thirds, though other studies haven't shown such conclusive results.

Brussels sprouts Sprouts contain a chemical called sinigrin which is thought to suppress the development of pre-cancerous cells.

It works by persuading the pre-cancerous cells to commit suicide - a natural process called apoptosis - and so powerful is the effect that some medics think that the occasional meal of sprouts could destroy pre-cancerous cells in the colon. However, dieticians recommend eating a variety of vegetables, including green leafy vegetables such as sprouts.

Watermelon Tomatoes, watermelons, guavas and grapefruit are rich in lycopene. This is a fat-soluble nutrient which appears to have a powerful action on the immune system by producing antioxidant activity in the body.

More and more evidence is stacking up to suggest that lycopene might be a useful tool in the fight against a wide range of life-threatening conditions, including prostate cancer.

Grapes An anti-fungal agent found in grapes my help to protect against cancer, according to researchers from De Montfort University in Leicester. Resveratrol is a molecule which helps grapes and other crops avoid fungus.

Researchers used laboratory tests and tumour examinations, and found that the body can convert resveratrol into a known anti-cancer agent that can target and destroy cancer cells. Researchers therefore believe that eating foods that contain resveratrol such as red grapes, mulberries and beansprouts, may help to reduce the risk of developing cancer.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

