TITLE	Could Chinese herbs and coffee cure cancer?

by CHARLOTTE HARDING, femail.co.uk

Alternative treatments for cancer are a controversial subject - making reliable information difficult to find.

Here we continue our guide to the five alternative therapy treatments causing the most interest in the UK

PC SPES The background This ancient Chinese mixture of eight herbs, including ginseng and liquorice, takes it name from PC for prostate cancer and spes, the Latin for hope. It has been on the market since 1999 and is used by an estimated 10,000 men. It appears to have a fairly wide acceptance in the medical community in the US and the UK, though it is less widely known in the UK. Some oncologists now appear to recommend it.

However in February this year the US Food and Drug Administration announced a nationwide recall of the drug because of 'possible contamination'. This contamination turned out to be a small and effectively harmless trace of warfarin, a commonly prescribed blood-thinning agent, which it later emerged was caused during the manufacturing process. Because the drug was only sold in America this had worldwide impact on supplies.

Long-term side-effects are still not known. Short-term side-effects include breast tenderness and enlargement and up to four in 100 patients run the risk of potentially deadly blood clots. For this reason even supporters only recommend its use by patients who have not been helped by traditional treatments.

The theory Although this drug has apparently had some anecdotal success with prostate cancer in the US, very little is known about how it works.

The research No definitive clinical trials have proved that the drug works. Two small studies in medical publications, the Journal of Urology and the Journal of Clinical Oncology, in 2000, show the blend of herbs in PC Spes seemed helpful for men who have tried conventional treatments.

Dr Aaron Katz, associate professor of urology at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, studied 69 men for the Journal of Urology. He found that 88 per cent of his patients taking the supplement had a significant drop in the levels of prostate specific antigen, or protein, which indicates tumours.

However Dr Eric Small of the University of California, San Francisco, co-author of the other study which reported a 54 per cent success rate warned: 'We don't know the long-term side-effects.'

The expert's view Dr James S Gordon, founder and director of the Center for Mind Body Medicine in Washington and the chairman of the White House Commission on Complementary and Alternative Medicine says: 'This is promising. Some of the early work that's been done shows promise and it's one of the treatments into which a lot of research is being done.

'Many Chinese herbs seem to have anti-cancer properties and I'm hopeful that the research that's being done into PC spes will lead to more research into other Chinese herbs. I believe that the key with this herb and other Chinese mixtures may be in individualising the mixture to each patient and I'd like to see more research into this.'

GONZALEZ REGIME The background This technique was invented by Dr Nicholas Gonzalez, a doctor who became interested in alternative approaches to treating cancer while he was studying at Cornell University Medical College in the early 1980s. He developed his own treatment consisting of an intensive nutritional programme which involves diet, supplements and detoxification.

The theory Patients are given their own individual programme with diets ranging from vegetarian to those high in animal proteins. Supplements consist of vitamins, minerals, glandular concentrates and enzymes. Patients may have to take up to 150 tablets a day. The detox programme involves coffee enemas which as said to 'help clear the body of metabolic wastes'. Patients must be able to eat and do the coffee enemas in order to benefit from the treatment.

The expert's view Dr James S Gordon, founder and director of the Center for Mind Body Medicine in Washington and the chairman of the White House Commission on Complementary and Alternative Medicine says: 'Some trials into this with patients with pancreatic cancer showed promise. But this is one of the more extreme treatments because it is a complete treatment which patients will often do instead of a conventional therapy. A large clinical trial is underway into this at the moment in New York and it should report back in two years.'

For more information on all alternative therapies for cancer visit the Center for Mind Body Medicine's website www.cmbm.org

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

