TITLE	How to tell if cancer runs in your family

Most families are touched by cancer. But for some, the risk of developing the disease can be greater.

Scientists now know that certain inherited faulty genes can make some families predisposed to the disease.

Today as part of our week-long focus on cancer we show you how to find out if these genes run in your family - and what to do if you think they do.

We are dedicating a whole week to the subject of cancer - and its prevention, treatment and cure.

Many of us are concerned about eating healthily - particularly if foods can influence our chances of developing cancer.

We have delved behind the headlines to investigate the foods that may be able to help you avoid the disease.

If you or a member of your family have been diagnosed with the disease we can also help.

Our complete guide to how to get the best cancer care will guide you through the confusing maze of medical jargon to help you get the best care you are entitled to.

If you are keen to learn more about complementary and alternative cures we have spoken to one of America's leading experts in the field to provide you with the most up-to-date research.

If you are having difficulty coping with the disease find out why talking about cancer can help lengthen your life. Our guide will also show you how to speak to all the people in your life about the disease - from your partner and children to your boss.

We've also included a complete guide to the latest cancer drugs, an animated guide to checking your breasts you can find details about the main cancers that affect women in our advice bank .

A top cancer expert has also answered all your questions about the illness.

We even have an interview with Brendan Halpin, whose inspirational book about his wife's battle with breast cancer has just been published.

To start reading our valuable guide just click on the links below.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

