TITLE	How to tell if breast, ovarian or skin cancer run in your family

by CHARLOTTE HARDING, femail.co.uk

Doctors now believe that some families are more prone to certain cancers than others.

Here is the second part of our guide to how to tell if you are at risk and what you can do to protect yourself.

BREAST CANCER Only five out of every 100 breast cancers are related to a known inherited breast cancer gene and the older your relatives were when they were diagnosed the less likely it is that an inherited gene is the direct cause.

But if you have a very strong family history of breast cancer it is possible that there may be a faulty gene in your family that may increase your risk of developing the disease - although it is not a certainty that you will develop the disease.

It is likely that there are several genetic faults that may cause breast cancer. So far scientists have discovered two of these faults - BRCA1 and BRCA2. If you do carry these faults your risk of developing the disease is as high as 85 per cent.

It is possible the cancer may run in your family if you have one of the following in your family history in living memory: &bull; One first degree relative (mother, father, sister, brother, daughter or son) who has had breast cancer diagnosed under the age of 40. &bull; Two first or second degree relatives (grandmother, grandfather, grandchild, aunt, uncle, niece or nephew) on the same side of the family with breast cancer diagnosed under 60 or with ovarian cancer. &bull; Three first or second degree relatives on the same side of the family with breast or ovarian cancer. &bull; A first degree relative with breast cancer in both breasts. &bull; A first degree male relative with breast cancer. 

How you can protect yourself If you fall into one of the categories above it is best to go to your GP to discuss the options. In the first instance it's usually recommended that you should go for regular mammograms, X-rays of the breast, to try to detect early cancer.

These should start ten years earlier than the age your youngest relative was diagnosed with breast cancer - ie if you have a relative who was diagnosed at 35 you should start being screened from the age of 25. If you appear to have a very strong family history of breast cancer your GP can also refer you to a local genetic centre for assessment. It is possible to be tested for the faulty breast cancer genes on the NHS - but only if you have a living relative with breast cancer.

Your relative will have to be tested first to identify which fault they have and then researchers can look for the same gene fault in you. The test results will take a few weeks and you will be given counselling before and after the test.

A new type of test has recently been developed which will allow a patient to be tested who does not have a living relative with breast cancer. But this is currently only available privately.

If the test is negative this does not necessarily rule out that you have a faulty breast cancer gene, it may simply be that you have one of the faulty genes not yet discovered. In these cases it's usually recommended that you continue to have regular mammograms.

If the test comes back positive this means you carry one of the known breast cancer faulty genes.

There are three options available if this is the case: having regular breast screening, joining a trial for a new drug to prevent the disease or having surgery to remove your breasts. Some women choose to have surgery, followed by breast reconstruction, but while it will reduce your risk it will not completely rule out the risk of breast cancer.

Women who choose the surgery option may also be advised to have their ovaries removed as the breast cancer gene fault increases the risk of ovarian cancer too. For more advice and support contact the Hereditary Breast Cancer Helpline on 01629 813000

OVARIAN CANCER Inherited ovarian cancer accounts for around one in 20 cases of the disease. There are several genetic factors that increase the risk of ovarian cancer, such as inherited gene mutations of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, and an inherited disease known as Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colon Cancer (HNPCC).

It is possible the cancer may run in your family if you have one of the following in your family history in living memory: &bull; Two first degree relatives (mother, father, sister, brother, daughter or son) on the same side of the family with ovarian cancer. &bull; One first degree relative with ovarian cancer and one first degree relative with breast cancer on the same side of the family diagnosed under 50. &bull; One first degree relative with ovarian cancer and two first or second degree relatives with breast cancer on the same site of the family diagnosed under 60. 

How you can protect yourself If you fit into one of these groups then you may be able to be screened for the disease. If this is the case ask your GP to refer you to your local genetic centre for tests. Unfortunately no one test has yet been developed that is one hundred per cent successful in screening for ovarian cancer.

However women who appear to have a family history of the disease can be given yearly blood tests for a chemical called CA125 which sometimes appears in the blood of women with ovarian cancer. If the test finds that a woman's levels of CA125 are raised the next step is a transvaginal ultrasound - an examination that is done by placing an ultrasound probe into the vagina. This allows doctors to get a better look at the ovaries. It may also be possible to join a research trial for new methods of screening for the disease.

If you are at higher risk of ovarian cancer, screening can start from the age of 25 upwards or from five years before the age at which your youngest relative was diagnosed, depending in which is earliest. Screening will then be carried out annually.

If you have both breast and ovarian cancer in your family there is another test you can have for the faulty genes BRCA1 or BRCA2.

SKIN CANCER It is possible the cancer may run in your family if you have one of the following in your family history in living memory: &bull; A close relative (mother, father, brother or sister) who has had a malignant melanoma (the most severe form of skin cancer). &bull; You or other members of your family suffer from the condition familial dysplastic naevus syndrome (a condition which means you have a large number of moles). 

How you can protect yourself If you fit into one of these groups ask your GP to refer you to a Pigmented Lesion Clinic. These are special clinics set up to check for malignant melanomas - potentially lethal forms of skin cancer.

 You should attend the clinic once a year to have your moles examined by a doctor or nurse specially trained to look out for moles that may be about to turn cancerous. Any moles that appear to be abnormal can be removed and examined for signs of the cancer.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

