TITLE	Soya could beat breast cancer

Tofu and soya milk may reduce a woman's risk of breast cancer, new research suggested today.

Diets rich in soya appear to affect the make-up of breast tissue, said scientists from the charity Cancer Research UK.

Women who ate a lot of soya were much less likely to have the "dense" tissue associated with breast cancer.

Scientists had previously suspected that soya might contribute to the low rates of breast cancer in countries such as China and Japan. But until now, the evidence has proved inconclusive.

The new findings came from joint work by experts from Cancer Research UK, the National University of Singapore, and the US National Cancer Institute.

Data from two studies of women living in Singapore were combined in order to analyse the effect of diet on their breast tissue.

One focused on women's eating habit, including their intake of soya. The other used mammograms to class women according to the density of their breast tissue.

The researchers identified a group of 406 women who took part in both studies. They found that women who ate the most soya were 60 per cent less likely to have "high risk" breast tissue than those who ate the least.

Dr Stephen Duffy, from Cancer Research UK's Mathematics, Statistics and Epidemiology Department in London, said: "There has always been a question mark over a connection between soya and breast cancer. Some studies have suggested a link but others haven't.

"This research shows for the first time how the amount of soya a woman eats may have an effect on breast tissue and in turn may potentially reduce her risk of breast cancer."

Scientists think the active ingredient in soya is isoflavone - a member of a family of plant chemicals called phytoestrogens which mimic that action of the female sex hormone oestrogen.

Many cases of breast cancer are largely caused by the way oestrogen acts on breast tissue.

Isoflavone may block oestrogen in the breast, and its own action is weaker than that of the natural hormone.

Exposure to phytoestrogens seem to lengthen a woman's menstrual cycle. Previous research has suggested that the fewer menstrual cycles a woman goes through in her lifetime, the lower is her risk of breast cancer.

Sir Paul Nurse, interim chief executive of Cancer Research UK, said: "Breast cancer now affects nearly 40,000 women in the UK every year, making it the most common form of cancer. That's why it's vital that we find new ways of preventing the disease.

"These findings make an important contribution towards our on-going studies on the relationship between diet and cancer, and may eventually point to new ways of preventing breast cancer."

The results were reported in the journal Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and Prevention.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

