TITLE	HRT linked to breast cancer

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Scientists have warned women against long-term use of HRT after discovering a 26 per cent higher risk of breast cancer.

They have abandoned a major research programme after deciding the health risks far outweighed the benefits.

The study also found a 29 per cent increase in heart attacks, a 41 per cent increase in stroke and a 22 per cent rise in cardiovascular disease.

There was also double the risk of blood clots for those taking HRT compared with women taking a 'dummy' pill, according to a report released by the Journal of the American Medical Association.

The study, by the U.S. National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, investigated the effects of HRT using a combination of the hormones oestrogen and progestogen.

In Britain, this combination is sold in a different dose as a pill under the brand name Premique.

An estimated one million British women use HRT, which relieves the symptoms of the menopause such as hot flushes and mood swings by replacing the body's supply of oestrogen.

Previous studies raised hopes that HRT would turn out to be a potential 'cure-all' for chronic conditions of late middle-age, including cardiovascular disease, osteoporosis and Alzheimer's. The halting of the latest study three years early will dash some of these hopes as researchers claim the breast cancer risk finding 'is too high a price to pay'.

Last night, British experts said the extra breast cancer peril was already known, as a review of evidence by Oxford University experts in 1999 found the risk went up by 25 per cent.

Malcolm Whitehead, director of the Amarant Trust which provides help and advice to menopausal women, said women should remember not every type of HRT had the same effect.

The extra risk of breast cancer was probably the same as that caused by being overweight, not having had children, or drinking too much alcohol, he added.

But the number of women developing breast cancer because of HRT could be substantial over time, he said, although most British women only use it for a year.

'This particular combination is not available here or in Europe, but similar ones are, and if you are having long-term treatment, you should go to your doctor and talk about the risks and whether you should continue.'

The Medicines Control Agency, the Government's drug safety body, is to put new warnings on HRT products about the increased breast cancer risk.

These were planned before the latest evidence.

The American research programme, known as the Women's Health Initiative study, which was due to run until 2005, was stopped after five years because preliminary data found more breast cancers in women taking a form of HRT called Prempro.

Instead of an expected heart benefit, there was a 29 per cent increase in heart attacks, along with a 41 per cent increase in stroke and 22 per cent increase in cardiovascular disease.

The benefits included a 37 per cent reduction in bowel cancer rates, a cut of one-third in hip fractures and total fractures reduced by 24 per cent.

Almost 17,000 healthy women aged between 50 and 79 are taking part in the study, which is continuing to monitor a group of women taking oestrogen only after a hysterectomy.

Professor Gordana Prelevic, an endocrinologist and HRT expert at London's Royal Free Hospital, said: 'We were all looking forward to the results of this study because these are healthy women.

'For that reason, the cardiovascular findings are worrying.

'Currently, the advice I give is to say if you have post-menopausal

symptoms there is nothing which can replace HRT.

'But if you want to prevent heart disease, you're better off with a good diet and exercise, and there are powerful drugs that can treat osteoporosis which are far better than HRT.'

A spokesman for the Medicines Control Agency said: 'The possibilityof an increased risk of breast cancer with combined oestrogen/progestogen HRT compared with oestrogen- only therapy has been known for some time.

'This is supported by the findings of the WHI study.'

Dr John Stevenson, chairman of Women's Health Concern, said the findings may not be the same for other types of HRT.

'It is therefore imperative that similar studies are carried out using different types of HRT than that used in WHI,' he said.

'Women who are currently taking this type of HRT (Premique or Premique Cycle) should not panic, as it is most unlikely to have caused any harm.

'However, they should discuss with their family doctor whether it would be advisable to switch to a different type of HRT preparation.' A spokesman for Wyeth Pharmaceuticals, which sells Premique, said the study did not investigate the use of its product for menopausal problems.

'It is important to recognise the critical role that combination HRT plays in treating the symptoms of menopause, the number one reason that women start therapy.

'For women taking combination HRT for the short- term treatment of symptoms, the benefits are likely to outweigh the risks.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

