TITLE	New HRT cancer fears

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Hormone Replacement Therapy is in a new cancer scare just a week after a major trial was abandoned because the health risks were too high.

Women who used oestrogenonly HRT were found to be 60 per cent more likely to develop ovarian cancer than those who had never tried it.

A team from the National Cancer Institute (NCI) in Maryland, found the level of risk increased with each year of use. After two decades, it was three times higher.

Last week it emerged that the U.S. had halted an eight-year trial after finding that combined oestrogen and progestogen HRT increased the risk of breast cancer, heart attacks and strokes. The new U.S. study is one of the first to show a greater cancer risk linked to oestrogen-only HRT.

The findings will renew concern among the estimated 2.5million British women using HRT. But experts here said the vast majority took it for around five years to control menopausal symptoms.

Doctors had previously thought oestrogen in HRT might prevent ovarian cancer.

Consultant gynaecologist Peter Bowen-Simpkins said: 'The extra risk is small, but women with a family history of ovarian cancer need to be aware of it.'

HRT relieves the symptoms of the menopause, such as hot flushes and mood swings, by replacing the body's supply of oestrogen which is lost from around the age of 50.

Women who have had a hysterectomy can use oestrogen-only products, while others also need progestogen to guard against a greater risk of womb cancer.

Results of the new study, which involved 44,241 women aged around 57, are published today in the Journal of the American Medical Association, which last week reported HRT findings from the Women's Health Initiative study.

The industry body HRT Aware said: 'The number of incidences of ovarian cancer generally is very low - 4.4 cases per 10,000 patients. That number rose to 6.5 for women involved in the study.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

