TITLE	Breastfeeding cuts cancer risk

British women could halve their risk of breast cancer if they turned the clock back 100 years to an era of large families and mother's milk, scientists have revealed.

A massive study pooling data from 30 countries and 150,000 women found clear evidence that breastfeeding and having numerous children both cut the risk of breast cancer.

The longer a woman nursed a child at her breast, the more she was protected from the disease.

The findings help explain why breast cancer rates have until now been so much lower in developing countries than in Britain and the West.

If the reproductive habits of British women mirrored those of developing countries, it was estimated that their breast cancer risk by the age of 70 would fall from 6.3% to 2.7%.

But that would mean having half a dozen children and breastfeeding each of them for two years - just as British and western European women did a century ago.

The scientists from Cancer Research UK acknowledged that such a change would not be practical for western women today, who often combine child-rearing with the demands of a job and busy social life.

Dr Gillian Reeves, from the charity's UK Epidemiology Unit in Oxford, said: "To expect that substantial reductions in breast cancer incidence could be brought about by women returning to the pattern of childbearing and breastfeeding that typified most societies until a century ago is unrealistic.

"But even if women in the West were to breastfeed each of their children for an extra six months, this could prevent 5% of breast cancers each year."

At present, British women have an average of two children and breastfeed them for two to three months. Adding a further six months breastfeeding for each child could prevent more than 1,000 cases of breast cancer each year, the researchers found.

Currently, only one in five British mothers are still breastfeeding after six months.

Between five and eight UK women in every 100 can expect to get breast cancer in the UK by the age of 70.

Breast cancer rates in developing countries are between 1% and 2% - although they are rapidly going up as third world societies adopt more western lifestyles.

A total of 39,000 breast cancer cases are diagnosed in the UK each year, and 13,000 women die from the disease.

The researchers said the reason why breastfeeding reduced the risk of breast cancer was a mystery as it had never been investigated.

Sir Paul Nurse, interim chief executive of Cancer Research UK, said: "It's likely to have something to do with hormones and reproductive behaviour.

That's probably where one should look for the explanation."

Belinda Phipps, chief executive of the National Childbirth Trust, said: "The benefits of breastfeeding for babies are already well known - but this new evidence demonstrates very clearly that breastfeeding also carries enormous health benefits for mothers.

"We hope that this important finding - that the longer women breastfeed, they more they are protected from breast cancer - will encourage more women to consider breastfeeding their baby.

"We need to see a real shift away from the current bottle-feeding culture in the UK to one where breastfeeding is completely accepted and supported by society.

"Breastfeeding should become as unremarkable as reading a newspaper, so that more women are able to follow their instincts and breastfeed wherever and whenever their baby needs to be fed."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

