TITLE	HRT may give cancer protection

Women who take daily combined HRT may be better protected against cancer of the lining of the womb than those who do not use it, a new study has found.

Previous research has shown that long term use of a type of hormone replacement therapy which gives oestrogen and progestogen in sequence increases the risk of cancer of the lining of the womb (endometrial cancer).

But now, a study has found that long term use of combined HRT, in which oestrogen and progestogen are given daily, does not increase the risk of endometrial cancer.

In fact it may even protect the lining of the womb from the disease.

The research, published in today's British Medical Journal, is one of the largest long-term studies of its kind.

It involved 31 menopause clinics and 534 postmenopausal women across the UK who were all given a course of continuous combined HRT.

Before the study began 360 had taken hormone replacement therapy which gave oestrogen and progestogen in sequence, 164 had not used HRT and 10 had taken oestrogen-only HRT.

Biopsy samples were taken before they took the combined HRT, after nine months, between 24 and 36 months and at the end of the five year study.

Before the research began, 21 of the women were noted as having abnormal endometrium which, when associated with other cellular changes, can be an early sign of cancer.

The research found that after nine months of continuous HRT, in all 21 lining of the womb had reverted to normal and during the course of the study there were no cases of endometrial cancer.

The study authors, led by Professor Michael Wells of Sheffield University's Medical School, conclude that women who take daily combined HRT may be better protected against endometrial cancer than women who do not use any form of hormone replacement therapy.

Last month, an American study into the long term effects of combined HRT was stopped after researchers found that it increased the risk of invasive breast cancer, heart attacks and strokes.

Despite this, experts advised a study on HRT led by the Medical Research Council involving 5,000 UK women should continue as there was no scientific or ethical reason to stop it.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

