TITLE	More healthy raw food: fish, nuts and seeds

by NAOMI COLEMAN, femail.co.uk

If you want to lose weight this summer and boost your nutrient intake at the same time, include plenty of raw food in your diet.

Besides fruit and veg, there are other tasty raw foods which have amazing health benefits.

Here, we look at the health benefits of raw fish, seeds and nuts 

If you like fish, sushi makes an ideal healthy accompaniment to your salad. This highly nutritious, low-fat Japanese food is a combination of white rice and raw fish, including salmon and tuna. These fish are rich in omega-3 fatty acids which can help cut the risk of heart attacks, strokes and cancer.

But nutritionists say although raw fish is good for most of us, there are people who should avoid it, particularly pregnant women, elderly and young children. This is because these groups of people are more vulnerable to chemical residues in fish.

However, the Food Standards Agency says the amount of toxins found in fish is so small that it is still safe for most people to eat the recommended amount of two portions of oily fish per week.

If you can't eat fish - or simply want an alternative nutritional boost - opt for seeds.

Linseeds are a particularly good source of fibre. This is because they contain a high content of lignans - natural substances which have been found to be protective against breast cancer by regulating oestrogens and reducing tumour growth in later stages. Jane Griffin suggests sprinkling a handful of linseeds on your salad or soup every day.

Nuts are also an ideal raw food to choose this summer. Brazil nuts are one of the richest sources of selenium, an essential mineral that protects against the chromosome damage that can be the first stage of cancer.

Like most nuts, Brazils contain the essential fatty acid linoleic acid which is important for skin and hormone balance. Walnuts are also a good source of vitamins and minerals too: calcium, iron, magnesium, phosphorus, zinc, vitamins C and E, potassium and folic acid help strengthen bones, heart and blood.

Alternatively, choose peanuts brimming with nutrients. They contain iron, zinc, vitamin E and magnesium and folic acid, as well as an antioxidant called resveratrol which is effective in fighting toxins in our body.

Peanuts are rich in omega-6 fats, which not only help to build healthy cells and maintain supple skin, but also lower total cholesterol in the blood.

But a word of caution: if you're watching your weight, don't eat too many. Nuts are high in fat, though most of it is unsaturated and better for your health than animal-based fat.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

