TITLE	Fresh hope for cancer sufferers

by ANDREA PERRY, femail.co.uk

Scientists are bringing fresh hope to cancer sufferers of the future with a series of breakthrough initiatives aimed at finally cracking the cure.

Hundreds of vaccines are under development around the world with billions of pounds being pumped in to research in a bid to find the ultimate cancer cure.

Cancer causes over 154,000 deaths a year but while a cure is still along way off The Cancer Research Campaign, has been encouraged by the recent announcement of the first draft of the human genome - which promises to clarify the complete operating instructions for the human body.

The work will revolutionise the detection, prevention and treatment of a whole range of conditions including cancer. In addition, oncology is one area of medical practice that is being transformed by genetic science.

In a recent report on cancer vaccines, Annie Angle, senior information nurse, for The Cancer Research Campaign, says: 'The new knowledge holds out hope that one day, it will be possible to control cancer in the way we have controlled other diseases such as diabetes.

'Vaccine therapy is one of the most exciting new approaches in the treatment and potential cure of different types of cancer areas and there is an increasing amount of stories focusing on vaccines.'

'Vaccine therapy is still in its very early stages and much needs to be done to provide clear evidence of its benefits. No cancer vaccine has been developed that has become the standard treatment for any cancer and the results from trials so far show that only a small number of patients have benefited from them.'

Ms Angle, who doesn't want to give false hope to current cancer sufferers goes on to point out that scientists believe that one third of cancers could be prevented with changes to our lifestyle, such as maintaining a healthy diet, eliminating smoking, and avoiding prolonged sun exposure.

Here is our guide to some of the latest scientific research offering hope to millions.

Hope one

&bull;A genetically engineered vaccine is being trialled on patients in Manchester's Christie Hospital, with low-grade lymphoma, a cancer of the lymphatic system, for which there is no permanent cure.

The vaccine triggers the body's own defences into fighting this paticular form of cancer.

The study is spearheaded by Professor Robert Hawkins, Christie's director of medical oncology, with scientists at Southampton University.

He said: 'Our hope for the vaccine is at least a much longer life extension and, at best, a cure. Because it may help the body's immune system fight the cancer, there shouldn't be any side effects and it would therefore be a much kindest treatment.'

Prof Hawkins added: 'Each will have a different dose and we shall see which is the most effective. The only way we can tell if the vaccine is working is if the patients remain free of cancer.'

Hope two

&bull;A new study run by the Northern Ireland Cancer Genetics Service is attempting to determine if people carry a cancer gene.

It has been launched at a County Armagh hospital and aims to prevent cancer developing in people whose families have a history of the disease.

It is hoped that the scheme will detect signs of cancer not just in its early stage, but even before it begins to develop.

Doctors will try to gauge the risk of families developing certain types of cancer such as colon, breast and ovarian cancers.

Funded by the charity Action Cancer, the genetics service is based at Belfast City hospital.

Hope three

&bull;Scientists are developing space-age devices that instantly spot tumours and could revolutionise cancer diagnosis.

The probes would not look out of place in the sick bay of the Starship Enterprise. Fitted to scalpels, they could guide surgeons to cancerous tissue without the need for a biopsy.

Biopsies are presently the gold standard test for cancer and involve the surgical removal and analysis of a small tissue sample.

Teams in both the Netherlands and the US are investigating the devices, known as Raman spectroscopy probes.

The probes are able to detect different types of tissue, including cancerous tissue, through wavelengths from laser light which bounces off a material.

Tests in rats showed that the probe was able to detect second-stage cancer every time, and earlier stage abnormalities in seven cases out of nine.

London expert Ian Smith, from the Royal Marsden, said: 'It could be clinically very valuable if the technology lives up to expectations.'

Hope four

&bull;A vaccine which may stimulate the immune system to fight cancer has shown encouraging results in early trials.

Immunotherapy is designed to prime the immune system to identify the cancerous cells as invaders, and launch an attack.

This may either be able to destroy the tumours as a first line treatment or 'mop up' leftover cells which have survived surgery, radiotherapy or chemotherapy.

The latest vaccine has been tested on pancreatic cancer patients at John Hopkins University in Baltimore in the States. The three patients given the highest doses remain disease free 30 months after treatment.

Hope five

&bull;Oxford BioMedica has received approval to start trials on its anti-cancer drug Tro Vax.

Tro Vax is a gene-based therapeutic vaccine that is designed to stimulate the patient's immune system to mount a powerful anti-cancer response. The drug will be trialled on patients with late stage colorectal cancer which is a cancer of the colon and rectum.

The results todate have been very striking, with Tro Vax breaking immune tolerance to tumours and protecting against further tumour growth.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

