TITLE	Fifteen reasons to eat five portions a day

by HELEN FOSTER, Daily Mail

Research proves that fruit and vegetables can protect us from a range of illnesses, from cancer to heart disease.

For this to work, however, we need at least five portions a day. This may sound daunting but, in fact, it is easy to integrate fruit and vegetables into your diet.

For instance, did you know that frozen peas and baked beans both count?

Below, we reveal 15 medical benefits of eating enough fruit and vegetables, and tips to disguise them in everyday meals.

1. The World Health Organisation has found that 85pc of adult cancers are avoidable, and of these, around half are related to nutrition deficiencies in the Western diet - many of which can be rectified by eating those five portions of fruit and vegetables.

2. In the UK, one person dies every three minutes from coronary heart disease, but new research from Cambridge University has found that eating just one apple a day cuts your risk of premature death from heart disease by 20pc. Add one orange and one banana and that increases to 50pc.

3. Minor infections like colds and flu are also less likely if you eat plenty of fruit and veg - particularly kiwi fruit, raspberries, blueberries, red peppers and citrus fruit. These offer the best way to get high levels of vitamin C in your diet - and research shows that people with high intakes of vitamin C have 34pc fewer sick days than others.

4. A study in 1998 showed that a high-fibre diet will protect against breast cancer and prostate cancer. Cabbage, peas, beans, berries and dried fruit are particularly rich sources, but there is fibre in nearly all vegetables and most fruit.

5. Age-related memory loss is one of the most distressing elements of old age, but a 1999 study found that a diet containing the equivalent of half a cup of blueberries a day can actually stimulate the growth of new brain cells, which may prevent memory deterioration.

6. Most of us think only dairy products can help build bones, but dark green leafy vegetables such as broccoli and kale can

also provide calcium, while onions stop the process that causes bones to weaken. Studies from the University of Bern in Switzerland found just one gram of onion a day is enough to strengthen your skeleton.

7. Five portions a week of red fruit and vegetables - for example, tomatoes, watermelon and red pepper - can reduce the risk of lung cancer by a quarter.

8. Research at the University of Arizona has shown that a daily intake of five to ten portions of red, yellow or orange fruit and vegetables can reduce skin cancer risk by forming a UV protection layer under the skin.

9. According to the world's largest study on successful weight loss, focusing on a diet high in fruit and vegetables is a vital factor in losing weight and keeping it off. This is not surprising when you think that a 2-3tbsp portion of most fruit or veg contains just 50 calories - the same as five potato crisps or half a chocolate biscuit.

10. A high intake of fruit and veg has been shown to lower the risk of stomach cancer. A Swedish study on sets of twins found that a twin eating a high intake of fruit and vegetables had a 5.5 times less risk of stomach cancer than their brother or sister who did not eat a high intake of fruit and vegetables.

11. Research shows that compounds in cranberries and blueberries stop bacteria sticking to the inside of the urinary tract and so help prevent infections like cystitis from taking hold. A handful of blueberries or a glass of cranberry juice a day can cut frequency of attacks by 58pc.

12. Eating two-and-a-half carrots a day has been shown to lower cholesterol by 11 per cent in three weeks in Scottish studies. High cholesterol is one of the major risk factors in heart disease.

13. A 12 year American study showed a significant reduction in strokes among people

Broccoli can help strengthen bones

who consumed a high level of potassium. Fresh fruit and vegetables - particularly bananas, grapes, leeks and cabbages - all provide plenty of potassium.

14. Eating fewer than one-anda-half portions of fruit and vegetables a day increases your risk of cataracts - the major cause of blindness in the world - by 600pc. Spinach helps prevent cataracts and prevents agerelated macular degeneration - the commonest cause of blindness in people over 55.

15. Studies show that people who eat diets high in fruit and vegetables that contain vitamin B6 (such as bananas and avocados) find it easier to handle stress that those who did not.

Eat 5 by Helen Foster, published by Hamlyn, &pound;5.99.

5 WAYS TO HELP YOU EAT 5 AT EVERY MEAL:

Breakfast

1) Sprinkle a cup of berries on your cereal - 1 portion.

2) Mash a banana on your toast instead of jam - 1 portion.

3) Make a smoothie: Combine a glass of fruit juice with a banana, and a cupful of berries or another fruit - 3 portions.

4) Have beans on toast with a grilled tomato - 2 portions.

5) Combine fresh fruit and yoghurt: Try a chopped apple with 1 tbsp chopped apricots and 1 tbsp apricots with low-fat natural yoghurt - 3 portions.

Lunch

1) Instead of buying a pre-packed sandwich, get one made to order and ask for tomato, avocado, rocket, onions and alfalfa sprouts with your filling - 1-2 portions.

2) Bring soup to work in a flask - heat up a can and throw in some frozen peas, sliced mushrooms, carrots, sweetcorn or asparagus. Each 2tbsp is a portion.

3) Have a glass of juice instead of a fizzy drink - 1 portion.

4) Have a dessert. A portion of fruit after your meal will fill you up and add nutrients - 1 portion.

Dinner

1) Add vegetables to pizzas and stir fries. Pile pizza with mushrooms, peppers, spinach and extra tomato sauce. Add carrots, peppers and bean sprouts to stirfries - 1-2 portions.

2) Make a fruit dessert: Stuff a cored apple with 2tbsp raisins and bake at 200C/400F/Gas 6 for 45 minutes - 2 portions.

3) When making mashed potato, add vegetables. Cabbage, swede, carrots, parsnips, chopped onion or sweetcorn all work well - and add nutrients - 1 portion.

WHAT IS A PORTION?

VERY LARGE FRUIT: cantaloupe melons, watermelons, pineapple = 1 LARGE SLICE

LARGE FRUIT: grapefruits, mangos, papayas = HALF A FRUIT

MEDIUM FRUIT: apples, avocados, bananas, oranges, peaches, pears = A WHOLE FRUIT

SMALL FRUIT: apricots, clementines, figs, kiwi fruit, passion fruit, plums, satsumas, tomatoes = 2 WHOLE FRUIT

BERRY-TYPE FRUIT: blackberries, blackcurrants, blueberries, cherries, cranberries, gooseberries, grapes, raspberries, strawberries = 1 CUPFUL(SHOULD BE COFFEE MUG SIZED)

STEWED, TINNED, MIXED FRUIT: apples, apricots, fruit cocktail, fresh fruit salad, peaches, pears, pineapples = 3 TBSP

DRIED FRUIT: apricots, bananas, cranberries, dates, figs, papaya, pineapple, raisins, sultanas = 1 TBSP

FRUIT JUICE: all actual fruit juices, including tomato, freshly squeezed or processed, not fruit drinks = 1 MEDIUM GLASS (150ML/ 5FL OZ)

MIXED SALAD VEGETABLES: celery, cucumber, iceberg and other pale lettuces = 1 DESSERT BOWLFUL

CRUCIFEROUS VEGETABLES: broccoli, Brussels sprouts, cabbage, cauliflower, radishes, turnips, swedes = 2 TBSP

GREEN LEAFY VEGETABLES: chard, dark green winter cabbage, kale, pak choi, rocket, romaine lettuce, spinach, watercress = 2 TBSP

OTHER VEGETABLES: aubergines, carrots, green beans, mushrooms, onions, peas, peppers, squashes = 2 TBSP

SPROUTING BEANS: alfalfa, bean sprouts = HALF A CUPFUL

BEANS AND PULSES: baked beans, black beans, chickpeas, kidney beans, lentils, soya beans = HALF A CUPFUL

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

