TITLE	The cancer 'timebomb' in Balkan war shells

by MICHAEL CLARKE

Further evidence emerged yesterday of the health risks of the uranium ammunition blamed for mystery illnesses among soldiers serving in the Balkans.

Official reports by the British and American governments reveal how deadly dust given off by the shells when they explode can wreck the kidneys of anyone exposed to it.

They also reveal how the radioactive particles can lodge anywhere in the body, becoming a 'timebomb' capable of causing cancer in later life.

Tank-busting uranium shells are blamed for health problems among Gulf War veterans and concern is growing about their use in Bosnia and more recently in Kosovo, where 3,500 British troops are still based.

Portugal yesterday began screening 10,000 troops and civilians who have served in the Balkans for health problems caused by uranium poisoning.

France, Spain and Switzerland also claim more than a dozen of their troops may have died and 30 fallen ill as a result of 'Balkan War Syndrome'.

Evidence of how the dust can cause crippling damage to the kidneys comes in a U.S. defence department report, obtained by the Daily Mail. It warns that the danger comes, not from radiation, but from poisoning.

'Exposure to depleted uranium can cause kidney problems because of its heavy metal toxicity,' said Dr David Case, part of a U.S. team investigating the problem.

Another report, from the Ministry of Defence in London, spells out how uranium dust dissolved in liquid and swallowed can destroy kidney cells. In extreme cases, the poisoning can cause complete kidney failure.

Uranium absorbed into the blood travels around the body and can lodge in bones, fat, muscle or any other organs where they can trigger cancer in later life. Lung cancer is also a risk if the dust is inhaled.

London and Washington, however, insist that health problems result only from large doses of dust, and troops who served in the Gulf or Balkans are unlikely to have absorbed dangerous amounts.

In 1999, U.S. planes fired more than 30,000 depleted uranium shells at Serb tanks in Kosovo.

Tank wrecks, many coated with the uranium dust, litter the province. Hundreds of similar missiles were also fired in Bosnia in the mid-1990s.

The shells tear through a tank's armour and trigger an explosion which vapourises the uranium, creating a fine dust of particles.

The Ministry of Defence says troops in Kosovo are safe if they stay away from the hulks of wrecked Serb tanks.

But a letter from a Ministry official, also obtained by the Mail, says the dust can spread 'a few hundred metres' from where the shell burst.

It says the high-danger zone, where a soldier would be at risk if he spent much time, extends 'a few tens of metres' from the impact point.

The Government insists there is no evidence to show health problems have resulted from the shells.

But fears will be fuelled by the revelation that the ammunition has been tested in Britain since 1982, and not 1990 as previously admitted.

The shells are fired into the sea from a range near Kirkcudbright, Scotland, but several have exploded on land, showering the coastline with the dust.

The Government says the uranium contamination is 'well below anything that could be considered a health hazard'.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

