TITLE	Old-style mobiles linked to brain cancer

by JAMES CHAPMAN, Daily Mail

Mobile phones are at the centre of a new health scare after scientists found that millions of users face a far greater risk of developing a brain tumour.

In the most alarming research into cellphones and cancer yet, the study concluded that the risk of developing a tumour is almost doubled.

They looked at first generation mobiles - analogue phones - which were phased out in the UK between 2000 and 2001 and can no longer be used. However, at their peak during the mid-1990s, they were used by four million people.

The scientists refused to give the latest digital models a clean bill of health, warning that they had not been available for long enough for risks to emerge.

The researchers examined 1,617 patients aged between 20 and 80 in Sweden who had been diagnosed with a brain tumour between 1997 and 2000. They were then compared with healthy people.

Those who had used analogue phones for less than ten years faced a 26 per cent higher risk of developing brain cancer. But for those that used them for more than a decade the risk was 80 per cent higher.

The study also found that tumours were two-and-a-half times more likely to be on the same side of the head as the phone was held.

Another type of tumour, a cancer of the auditory nerve called acoustic neurinoma, showed a larger increase - a 3.5 times greater risk.

Sir William Stewart, the Government's former chief scientist who now leads its independent expert group on mobiles, called the findings ' potentially very significant'.

The study was discussed at a conference last year, but it has now been published in the European Journal of Cancer Prevention.

The study's authors - Professor Kjell Hansson Mild, of the Swedish National Institute for Working Life in Ume&not;, and Professor Lennart Hardell, a cancer specialist at Orebro University, said it was clear that users should 'exercise caution'.

Experts believe users of digital mobiles, which emit less radiation, could face similar health risks.

'Although we can see similar tendencies, any conclusions regarding these phones must wait until the results of other ongoing studies are published,' said Professor Mild, who is a member of the British government's committee in charge of mobile phone research.

Professor Hardell said: 'I am convinced that mobile phone use is a danger. We need to adopt a precautionary principle.'

But mobile phone manufacturers disputed the findings. Nokia of Finland said other studies showed no evidence of hazards.

A spokesman for Ericsson of Sweden said: 'The study and the conclusions it reaches differs from at least three other studies in the past in several highly regarded scientific journals.'

Dr Michael Clark, of the National Radiological Protection Board, the UK watchdog on radiation and health, said the study's findings had been passed to its expert committee for analysis.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

