TITLE	Cancer link to tap water in radon hotspots

by ANDREA PERRY, femail.co.uk

Government commissioned research has revealed that people living in radon hot spots could be at increased risk of stomach cancer from tap water.

Radon, a naturally occurring radioactive gas, seeps out of rocks, especially granite, and mainly affects areas such as Devon, Cornwall and the Derbyshire Dales.

It has previously been linked to lung cancer when inhaled and is estimated to cause around 2,500 deaths a year.

But now, according to the new study in west Devon, the gas could also lead to an increased risk of stomach cancer when drunk over long periods.

The tests focused on 116 locations in west Devon with private water supplies and found eight per cent had radon levels above the advisory level.

Researchers found for the first time that the radioactive gas does not disappear into the air when poured from the tap or boiled.

Instead the study ordered by the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions found around 20 per cent of the gas remained in the water when drunk.

The 18-month study also found seven per cent had levels of uranium higher than a World Health Organisation guideline level of two micrograms per litre.

Nick Payne, head of environmental services, at West Devon Borough Council, said the report offered vital new evidence.

'Other DETR studies have investigated radon at source but this study is the first in the United Kingdom to study radon levels at the tap,' he explained.

He said homes and businesses, which drew water from private boreholes, springs and wells were particularly affected.

Mr Payne added: 'The results indicate that a larger study needs to be commissioned, encompassing all radon-affected areas.' He called for the government to provide financial assistance to help people take remedial action to remove radon from supplies.

Dr Sarah Harrison, consultant for public health for the South and West Devon Health Authority said there was a small, but definite health risk.

'We feel people need to know about this, but not that they should be worried about it.' She said the study had concluded the radon in water was still less of a health risk than radon in air.

The Food Standards Agency has been informed of the research and said the findings could have consequences for food producers.

It is now planning to conduct a survey of radioactivity in UK bottled waters later this year.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

