TITLE	Measles in babies can double cancer threat

Babies who catch measles or flu soon after birth are twice as likely to develop brain cancer, according to a report.

It is the first to suggest that particular infections could be associated with tumours.

Experts at Cancer Research UK found that children living in areas where cases of measles were common around the time they were born were at twice the normal risk.

Exposure to influenza appeared to triple their risk, says the research published today in the British Journal of Cancer.

Lead researcher Professor Louise Parker, from the University of Newcastle, said: 'There's increasing interest in the possibility that exposure to infections very early in life might contribute to the incidence of children's brain cancer and our study is certainly consistent with that possibility.'

She added: 'It is difficult to produce strong evidence on the causes of childhood brain cancer, because the disease is rare and even when you look at large numbers of children, in our case 100,000, the number of cancers will be quite small.

'But our results do suggest that measles and flu could be associated with increased risk of the disease, and therefore that avoiding these infections might be one way of reducing cancer rates.'

Professor Parker and her colleagues examined all birth records in Cumbria from 1975 to 1992.

They assessed the levels of infections around the time of the birth of the children who developed brain cancer.

They also estimated exposure levels before birth, in the three months around and after birth and in the following three months.

The scientists stressed that the findings were preliminary.

Sara Hiom, a scientific adviser at Cancer Research UK, said that although the number of brain cancers found in the study were small, scientists felt there was enough evidence and clustering to show they were not just chance.

Exposure to other kinds of infection, apart from measles and flu, did not seem to have any effect on brain cancer rates.

Childhood brain cancer is a rare disease affecting about 290 children each year in Britain and causing about 100 deaths.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

