TITLE	HRT 'does more harm than good'

by BEEZY MARSH, Daily Mail

Millions of women who use HRT are today warned that the benefits of the treatment are outweighed by its risks.

The verdict on hormone replacement therapy follows a major review of scientific evidence by health experts.

They say that taking HRT for five years significantly increases the chances of suffering breast cancer, a potentially-fatal blood clot, or a stroke.

The popular therapy is used by more than 2.5million UK women to ease symptoms of the menopause.

But the evidence from four trials involving 20,000 users shows that a woman is more likely to contract a life-threatening disease than be protected against one.

Studies on healthy women using the therapy for five years found that for every 1,000 in their sixties there would be four extra cases of breast cancer, four strokes and four life-threatening blood clots on the lung.

Among healthy women in their fifties, there will be an three extra cases of breast cancer, two potentially-fatal blood clots and one stroke among every 1,000.

HRT does have some positive side-effects. It reduces the risk of suffering bowel cancer or a hip fracture but the reduction was only 1.7 per 1,000 in HRT users aged 50 to 59 and 5.5 per 1,000 women in their sixties.

Experts say on balance this means women in their fifties can expect to see one unexpected life-threatening health complication per 250 users.

For those in their sixties, the net danger is one extra health complication for every 150 users. The majority of UK women stay on HRT for five years, meaning thousands may be at risk.

Doctors said the findings applied to all forms of HRT used in Britain - combined therapy, using oestrogen and progestogen, and oestrogen-only.

Studies took into account women's varying backgrounds, disease histories, ethnicity and personal characteristics.

Women use the treatment to help avoid symptoms such as mood swings and hot flushes which occur as they approach the menopause.

Some studies have found HRT cuts the risk of heart disease, but the findings, published in the Lancet, say there is no evidence of this.

There was no significant change in the risk of developing womb cancer while on HRT.

Epidemiologists from Cancer Research UK's Epidemiology Unit at the Radcliffe Infirmary in Oxford carried out the review after a number of research findings caused alarm over HRT.

Study co-author Dr Gillian Reeves said: 'Could HRT seriously harm health? The answer to that question is yes it may.

'It does look, on balance, in the long term of roughly five years that the risk of adverse events outweigh the benefits.'

Professor Valerie Beral, lead author of the Lancet study, said: 'These estimates provide a rough guide to the likely overall change in incidence of seven major life-threatening conditions over a five-year period for typically healthy women in western countries using HRT.

'Each woman, may understandably give different weight to the importance of each condition, as well as to the relief of menopausal symptoms with HRT.'

Last night the Government's Medicines Control Agency, which monitors the safety of medicines, said HRT was being kept under review.

An expert group from the Committee on Safety of Medicines is compiling a report on HRT which will give their official view on its safety and risks associated with taking it.

Malcolm Whitehead, director of the Amarant Trust which advises women on HRT, said the findings were highly misleading.

He questioned whether they related to women most people would regard as 'normal and healthy'.

'The immediate issue is how many of these results relate to normal early post-menopausal women,' he said.

'Three or the four studies reviewed recruited women with previous cardiovascular disease. We are not looking at a group of apparently fit and healthy women.'

Maryon Stewart, founder of the Sussex-based Women's Nutritional Advisory Service, which advises on alternatives to HRT, said: 'I have to say that these results do not surprise me one bit as we see lots of women in our clinics who have taken HRT and become victims of it.

'We see women with a massive range of different side effects and problems that give both them and me a bad feeling about it.'

The studies examined included the U.S. Women's Health Initiative trial which was halted early when researchers found an increased risk of breast cancer and a lack of overall benefit.

The WHI study found a 29 per cent increase in heart attacks, a 22 per cent increase in heart disease and a 41 per cent increase in strokes among HRT users.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

