TITLE	Why kidney cancer is the fastest growing form of the disease

Kidney cancer is the fastest growing type of the disease in women and the increase could be due to rising levels of obesity, experts warned today.

New figures from Cancer Research UK show that cases of kidney cancer have increased by 22 per cent over the last 10 years.

This rate overtakes the rise in female breast, skin and lung cancers during the same period. Cigarette smoking is a major risk factor for kidney cancer but experts said that as there had not been a rapid rise in lung cancer, it was unlikely to be the sole explanation.

They believe obesity, which is another key risk factors, could explain the increase in the number of cases. The figures were released today ahead of the UK's first Kidney Cancer Awareness Week which begins tomorrow.

The week aims to raise the profile of the disease which causes 3,000 UK deaths each year. Obesity is gradually rising in Britain and more than 20% of the female population is now classed as obese.

Dr Nick James, a kidney cancer expert at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Birmingham, said: "American studies have shown that obesity can result in a four-fold increased risk of developing kidney cancer.

"Being overweight causes changes in hormones in the body, particularly for women and it could be this hormone imbalance that increases the risk of kidney cancer."

Fat cells produce excess amounts of the female hormone oestrogen, which can speed up the natural process of cell division and so lead to a higher risk of a cancer cell being formed. Dr James said the exact mechanism by which obesity can cause kidney cancer is likely to be complex. Scientists did not yet know whether the degree of obesity, or the age that weight gain occurs, made a difference to the risk.

Scientists at Cancer Research UK's Cancer Epidemiology Unit in Oxford are looking at data on diet and weight gain during adulthood in relation to kidney cancer. They are also considering other lifestyle factors that may contribute to the disease and hope to announce preliminary results early next year.

Sir Paul Nurse, Chief Executive of Cancer Research UK, said: "There is growing evidence that lifestyle factors have a big part to play in the development of kidney cancer. "Health messages about the dangers of smoking are making an impact and we are seeing a decline in the numbers of smokers.

"We now need to make sure people are also aware of the problems obesity can bring." There are almost 6,000 new cases of kidney cancer each year in the UK and it is the eighth most common cancer in men and the 14th in women. Kidney Cancer Awareness Week (September 23-29) is being run by the charity Kidney Cancer UK which provides support and advice for people with the disease.

Director and Trustee Mike Renshaw said: "Kidney cancer has remained in the shadows for too long. "Our aim in organising this week is to raise the profile of kidney cancer and to reassure those affected that they do not have to cope alone." Alongside fund-raising activities, the charity will also be launching a new fact pack for patients entitled Living With Kidney Cancer.

Newsreader Nicholas Owen said: "My recent diagnosis of kidney cancer was a total and utter shock. "Perhaps the greatest shock of all was that I didn't even know that this type of cancer existed."

He said he was lucky as his cancer was detected at an early stage and he had received a lot of public support. "I am now keen to help raise awareness of the symptoms of this condition and the importance of early diagnosis," he said.

Possible signs and symptoms of kidney cancer include: Blood in the urine Low back pain unrelated to injury A lump in the abdomen Fatigue Weight loss Recurrent fevers not associated with cold or flu High blood pressure Swelling of the ankles and legs 

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

