TITLE	Women who have surgery rather than face breast cancer

Tracey Barraclough saw her mother, grandmother and great grandmother die from ovarian cancer.

When she found that she had a fault in the BRCA1 gene, she decided at the age of just 38 to undergo a hysterectomy and have her ovaries removed.

When she realised the gene carried a higher risk of breast cancer, she also opted for a double mastectomy and breast reconstruction.

Now 42, she said: "I wanted to stop the chain that was going through my family. I wasn't prepared to go through the same thing.

"To me knowledge was power and if I had that knowledge I was not just going to sit back and wait."

Tracey, a church administrator, said the decision to have her ovaries removed was based on her family history, but the choice to have a mastectomy simply involved trusting statistics which was difficult.

"I have no regrets at all. It was the right thing to do," she said.

"I have had dark days but the overall feeling is positive and that I was doing the right thing."

"I feel more of a woman now than I did before. There is more to being a woman than a pair of boobs."

Tracey, who has a seven-year-old son Joshua, has recently started a support group in her home city of Leeds for women who have inherited a faulty BRCA1 gene.

Alexis Haines, 49, is about to undergo surgery to have her breasts removed and reconstructed.

She said having the faulty BRCA1 gene was "like a dark cloud following you around."

"When your odds are 30-40% increased that is totally unacceptable," she said.

She was diagnosed with breast cancer two years ago while living in Canada and was given a lumpectomy, followed by chemotherapy and radiotherapy, and told no more treatment was needed.

Two of her sisters had genetic testing and initially were given negative results.

Then last year it emerged that three of the four sisters had inherited a fault in the BRCA 1 breast cancer gene.

They were advised to have breast tissue removed, have implants inserted and to have their ovaries removed.

Alexis, a charity fundraiser, is due to undergo an operation to have her breasts removed and reconstructed on October 31.

She is of English origin, but grew up in Canada, and decided to move back to England.

While awaiting surgery, she said her career and relationships were on hold.

She said, in a society where actresses and pop stars had implants, there was no shame in a woman having them because she had a high risk of getting cancer.

"I say I am being reconstructed," she said. "I feel it does not make you less of a woman."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

