TITLE	Pregnancy drug linked to cancer

by JAMES CHAPMAN, Daily Mail

Thousands of women whose mothers took a widely prescribed drug in pregnancy face more than double the normal risk of breast cancer.

A study of 5,000 women found that those over 40 whose mothers were given diethylstilboestrol (DES) were two and a half times more likely to get the disease.

Used routinely from the 1940s to the 1970s, the synthetic oestrogen was thought to prevent miscarriage and other complications.

It was withdrawn in 1975 because of concern about the long-term effects it had on the children.

When the daughters grew up, many developed cancers of the vagina or other disorders of the reproductive system.

The sons had low sperm counts, undescended testicles and a possible increase in testicular cancer.

The American study - details of which will be published this week in the journal Cancer Causes and Control - is the first to identify a greatly increased risk of breast cancer.

Estimates of the number of British women whose mothers took the drug range from 15,000 to 100,000.

Worldwide, six million mothers are believed to have taken it.

As the drug was sold by up to 100 manufacturers, there is no proper record of who was prescribed it.

In the 1950s, some manufacturers urged doctors to give all women the drug to ensure they had 'bigger and stronger babies'.

Most women who took the drug did so for most of their pregnancy, exposing the foetus to very high levels of oestrogen.

For the study, researchers from the U.S. National Cancer Institute and several schools of medicine looked at 5,000 women who were exposed to DES in the womb then compared them to a group who were not.

Both groups have been followed for years.

Overall, the DES daughters had a 40 per cent increased risk of breast cancer.

But when the researchers looked at those over 40, they found a much higher risk.

Among that group the average increased risk was 250 per cent higher.

The study was led by epidemiologist Dr Julie Palmer.

She said so far the number of women who had breast cancer was small, but the group were just reaching middle age.

A spokesman for DES Action UK, a support group for women affected by the drug, said the findings were ' alarming' and called for the Government to draw up a register of those at risk so they could be offered screening.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

