TITLE	Secret benefits of whole grains and how to enjoy them

by CHARLOTTE HARDING, femail.co.uk

Carbohydrates are out of fashion at the moment.

A rash of celebrity diets which either cut them out completely or drastically reduce their intake have seen many British men and women shunning the traditional staples of bread, pasta and rice.

But a series of studies now show that one particular type of carbohydrate is incredibly important for our health - whole grains.

Research shows that these cereals, such as unrefined wheat, corn, oats, barley, rye and rice, can reduce the risk of heart disease by 30 per cent, cut the risk of strokes by more than 40 per cent, reduce the risk of several cancers, prevent diabetes - and even help you slim.

Unfortunately, many of us have no idea where to find whole grains in our diet - and often assume they are tasteless so have little inclination to try!

Here is our guide to how and why you should be including more whole grains in your diet. Click on the link at the bottom of the page for delicious whole grain foods you can start including in your diet today!

WHAT ARE WHOLE GRAINS? The most common types of grain in Britain are wheat, corn, oats, barley, rye and rice. Whole grain foods are those which have had no part of the grain removed during the milling process. This means that the fibre-rich outer later, the middle layer and nutrient packed inner layer of the grain are all eaten. Because of this, whole grain products are generally darker in appearance compared to heavily processed products - hence the colour of brown rice, compared to white.

WHY ARE THEY SO HEALTHY? Whole grains have a myriad health benefits. Perhaps the most well-known is their high fibre content. This helps keep bowels healthy, prevents constipation and can also guard against colon cancer. They also release the sugar they contain more slowly than refined carbohydrates which, according to a recent American study, can help prevent diabetes.

Because the extra fibre in whole grain foods makes them naturally bulkier they can also aid weight loss because they help the eater feel fuller for longer. The soluble fibre found in whole grains such as oats can also help reduce blood cholesterol levels - which in turn protects against heart disease.

Surprisingly whole grains are also great sources of antioxidants - the wonder nutrients that have been proven to protect our cells from damage by harmful substances including smoke and

Tabouleh salad is just one of the delicious ways to eat whole grains

pollution - and so reduce the risk of heart disease and cancer.

They are also full of minerals such as iron, calcium, copper and zinc. Iron is needed to transport oxygen through the body, calcium is essential for bone health, zinc helps fight infection and promotes cell growth and copper promotes healthy blood, heart and bones.

Whole grains are also a particularly good source of B vitamins which help the body convert food to energy, prevent birth defects and may help to protect against heart disease.

Research is also underway into one of the other likely health benefits of whole grains - phytochemicals, naturally occurring plant chemicals which are not available in any vitamin tablet that protect against disease.

Finally, whole grains are also a surprisingly good source of protein - essential for growth, body maintenance and repair.

HOW MANY SHOULD I BE EATING? Nutritionists now recommend that we should all be trying to include three portions of whole grains in our diet every day. One portion is equal to one slice of bread or a small roll, half a bagel, half a cup of cooked brown rice or half a cup of cooked cereals such as oats.

 Click on the link below for our guide to the delicious whole grain foods you can start including in your diet today!

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

