TITLE	Mobiles 'boost cancer'

by TIM UTTON, Daily Mail

New safety fears about mobile phones emerged yesterday over a possible link with cancer.

Radiation from the phones could promote the growth of tumours, according to scientists.

A new study suggests the radiation can kick cancer cells into 'high gear' and make tumours grow much more aggressively.

There are 40million mobile users in the UK, but despite the millions spent on research in the last decade, the health implications of sustained use are still unclear.

The biggest British study, led by Sir William Stewart two years ago, could find no evidence of a risk to health. But Sir William still recommended a precautionary approach, particularly in children.

The World Health Organisation has called for more research and has urged people to limit mobile use.

Now Italian scientists believe they could be closer to the truth.

Dr Fiorenzo Marinelli, of the National Research Council in Bologna, exposed leukaemia cells in the laboratory to 48 hours of continuous radio waves at a similar power and frequency to mobile phone emissions.

Initially, the radiation killed the cancer cells. But then the scientists noticed this lethal effect had gone into reverse as a 'survival mechanism' was triggered, which made them replicate at a ferocious speed.

Dr Marinelli said: 'We don't know what the effects would be on healthy human cells.

' But in leukaemia cells the response is always the same.'

The radiation may initially damage DNA, he said, interfering with chemical signals in a way that ultimately triggers the defensive reaction prompting cancer cells to replicate faster.

Cancer develops when control signals in a normal cell go wrong and an abnormal cell results. Instead of destroying itself the mutant cell keeps on dividing and forms a lump or tumour.

The results of the Italian study support the belief of some scientists who say radiation can damage DNA and destroy the cell repair system - making tumours more deadly.

Dr Peter de Pomerai of the University of Nottingham, who studied effects on the body earlier this year, said the research was 'intriguing'.

Radiation may indirectly damage DNA by affecting its repair system, he said. If the

DNA repair mechanism does not work as well as it should, mutations in cells could accumulate - with disastrous consequences.

'Cells with unrepaired DNA damage are likely to be far more aggressively cancerous,' said Dr de Pomerai. Dr Marinelli presented his results at the International Workshop on the Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Fields, held in Greece.

The study is published in this week's New Scientist.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

