TITLE	Our guide to vulval cancer

by ROSALIND RYAN, femail.co.uk

A thousand women are diagnosed with vulval cancer every year in Britain. The effects can be devastating.

But many of the pre-cancerous stages of vulval cancer can be treated if they are caught early enough, so it is important to be aware of the signs and symptoms of the disease.

Read our brief guide below to vulval cancer and click on the link at the bottom of the page to read one woman's inspiring story.

What is cancer of the vulva?

Cancer of the vulva is a cancer that affects the outer area of a woman's sexual organs. It can appear on any area of the vulva.

It is quite a rare cancer, but it can be fatal if the cancer spreads to the lymph nodes or glands as this will cause it to spread rapidly to other parts of the body.

However, vulval cancer itself does not develop rapidly. It is normally caused by a few cells which become abnormal and can slowly develop into cancer over time. Cancer Research UK, Britain's largest cancer charity, says finding and treating these abnormal cells early can stop the cancer's development.

What causes this type of cancer?

There are a number of factors that make developing vulval cancer more likely. These include age, the human papilloma virus (HPV) and pre-cancerous changes to the skin in the vulva.

Vulval cancer is most commonly found in women over the age of 50, but more cases are being found in younger women. The average age of woman diagnosed with this type of cancer is between 65 and 70 years old.

The HPV virus is thought to be responsible for nearly 50 per cent of vulval cancers. The virus, transmitted through sexual activity, can cause changes in the skin cells of the

vulva, leading to pre-cancerous cells.

However the HPV virus is normally symptomless, so you will not know you carry the disease until pre-cancerous changes develop.

There is currently no screening system for the HPV virus in the UK. Doctors in America can check for the HPV virus if a cervical smear test comes back with abnormal cells, but no such system exists in this country. However, you can pay for private HPV tests in Britain if you want to.

A pilot scheme testing women for HPV at the same time as a smear is currently underway in Britain and the results are expected later this year.

What are the symptoms?

The symptoms of vulval cancer can include a lasting itch or soreness, thickened and white or red patches on the skin, a lump or growth, pain on passing water and bleeding or discharge.

These symptoms can all be caused by other conditions so it is important to have them checked out by your doctor.

Because there is currently no screening programme for vulval cancer in Britain, it is important that you check yourself regularly for any changes. Doctors recommend using a mirror to look for any areas of red, irritated, white or darkly coloured skin.

The vulva should be also examined by a doctor as part of a cervical smear test. If he/she notices anything unusual, you should be referred for further tests to identify the virus.

How is vulval cancer diagnosed and treated?

Vulval cancer is usually diagnosed with a biopsy - a tissue sample taken from the 'risk' area. Initially you or your doctor will have noticed something unusual and you will be referred to a specialist.

Your specialist, or gynaecologist, will examine you - internally and externally - and may then carry out a biopsy. The biopsy will be sent for analysis to determine whether or not you have cancer. If the results are positive, you may then have further tests to determine how far the cancer has spread.

The treatment for vulval cancer will depend on how advanced the disease is when it has been diagnosed and the position of the tumour. The early stages of cancer are usually treated with surgery.

More advanced forms may be treated with surgery and then radiotherapy after the operation as a precaution against any more abnormal cells appearing.

The most highly developed forms of cancers are usually treated with radiotherapy to shrink the tumour before surgery, radical surgery to remove as much 'neighbouring' tissue as possible and then maybe more radiotherapy after treatment.

Your specialist will explain in detail to you what treatment you will be receiving and why.

What can I do if I think I have vulval cancer?

The first thing you should do is make an appointment to see your doctor. You should also make note of how long you have noticed any changes and what they are - this will help your doctor make a diagnosis.

You should not ignore your condition if you are concerned. Many women - especially older women who are also more at risk of vulval cancer - may be too embarrassed to seek help from their GP. But making an appointment could put your mind at rest and save you from the need for radical surgery.

For more information about vulval and other cancers, visit www.cancerbacup.org.uk or log onto www.cancerhelp.org.uk and follow their guides for specific cancers.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

