TITLE	Breast scans 'may be a risk to some women'

Women who are genetically predisposed to breast cancer should avoid frequent mammograms, a study warned yesterday.

German researchers say the X-rays used in the scanning process may increase the risk of mutating the genes that cause the cancer to develop.

Instead, the report in New Scientist magazine suggested women should insist on other methods of screening such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).

Marlis Frankenberg-Schwager, a radiobiologist at the University of Gottingen, said: 'Women with an inherited, increased breast cancer risk should avoid frequent and early mammography screening.'

According to the research, as many as one in 200 women inherit a genetic mutation that greatly increases the risk of breast cancer.

Doctors presently encourage these women to have annual mammogram check-ups from as early as 25.

But Miss Frankenberg-Schwager's study concludes that the X-rays in mammograms are almost three times as likely to mutate genes in human cells as conventional X-rays.

Generally, women have two healthy copies of the gene so the chances of both being destroyed in the same cell are remote, the research said.

But for women with inherited mutations, the chances are much greater, according to the study.

The warning comes two months after researchers in Toronto cautioned that breast screening was no more effective than a physical examination in cutting cancer deaths among younger women.

The Canadian study of 50,000 women in their 40s found screening did spot breast cancer earlier.

But the research also discovered that those diagnosed by an annual mammogram only had a similar survival rate to those finding breast lumps during a physical examination.

However, the World Health Organisation said earlier in March that screening women in their 50s and 60s was beneficial.

The conclusion of the German study has been rejected by Britain's National Radiological Protection Board.

Its head of radiation, Roger Cox, said he did 'not see good cause for reconsidering mammography'.

He pointed out that the International Commission on Radiological Protection in Stockholm estimates that the additional risk from mammograms to women with a genetic mutation is just a fraction of one per cent.

But, according to the German study's coauthor, Dieter Frankenburg, this statistic only applies to women over the age of 40.

He calculated that any woman under 20 who has ten mammograms increases her chances of cancer by a factor of 2.5.

Although there are no figures for women between the ages of 20 and 40, the risk for these women is far greater than a fraction of one per cent, said Mr Frankenburg.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

