TITLE	How IVF raises cancer risks

by JAMES CHAPMAN, Daily Mail

Babies born through fertility treatment are six times more likely to suffer from a rare combination of birth defects that increase their risk of cancer, a study has warned.

The findings - thought to be the first to firmly link a genetic disorder to in-vitro fertilisation (IVF) - will raise serious questions about the safety of the treatment.

There is increasing concern about potential health problems among testtube babies - there have been 68,000 born in Britain since the first in 1978.

Last month, Britain's fertility watchdog, the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority, announced an inquiry into the health of youngsters born using the technique.

The latest study, by scientists from Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore and Washington University School of Medicine, suggests IVF increases the risk of a rare combination of defects characterised by excessive growth of various of the body's tissues.

After studying data from a U.S. national register of patients with the condition, called Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), the researchers found that IVF-initiated conception was six times more common than in the general population.

Children born with BWS are predisposed to a type of kidney cancer called Wilms' tumour, a liver cancer called hepatoblastoma, cancer of the nervous system and other tumours.

The scientists, whose findings will appear early next year in the American Journal of Human Genetics, stress that the danger would apply to only a tiny fraction of babies conceived via IVF, if the findings are confirmed.

'This analysis should not affect people's decisions about whether to have IVF, because our findings still need to be validated,' said Dr Andrew Feinberg, who led the study. 'What is learned might improve the health of all children.'

BWS occurs in about 1 in 15,000 births overall. Currently, IVF is not thought to result in birth defects at a higher rate than natural conception, according to the U.S.-based Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology.

Dr Feinberg believes that some aspect of the method of combining the sperm and egg in IVF, or the way resulting embryos are stored, could possibly affect their genetic structure.

Lord Winston, the Labour peer and IVF pioneer, said last night: 'From research we have recently published, I would be very surprised if there were not changes in gene expression at least on rare occasions after IVF. This data will have to be looked at very carefully.'

Bob Baker, director of the Beckwith-Wiedemann Support Group, said similar research is under way in the UK. 'We are working with the Royal Free Hospital-in London to see what the incidence of IVF is among our families,' he said.

Leading British fertility expert Professor Ian Craft declared the U.S. study 'potentially important'.

He added: 'On the whole, IVF has been remarkably safe rather than the other way round.'

The Medical Research Council and the HFEA have set up a joint working party to decide how to carry out a follow-up study of all IVF children born during the past 23 years.

For more information about BWS, families can contact the support group on 01258 817573.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

