TITLE	Promiscuous teenagers risk cancer

by RACHEL WLLIS, Mail on Sunday

Teenage girls who are promiscuous are putting themselves at risk of developing cancer later in life, a leading British scientist has warned.

Professor Julian Peto says a woman's sexual past can come back to haunt her decades later.

His research has shown that having unprotected sex with multiple partners and becoming sexually active at a young age increase the chance of catching a sexually transmitted disease called the human papilloma virus. HPV causes almost all cases of cervical cancer.

Professor Peto believes the virus may stay with a woman for life, increasing her chance of developing cervical cancer, which affects 3,000 British women a year and kills 1,300.

The warning comes as cases of sexually transmitted diseases are at a 10-year high among young people, with women aged 16 to 24 at particular risk.

Britain also has the highest teenage pregnancy rate in western Europe, with 101,000 girls under 20 becoming pregnant in 1998. Professor Peto, Cancer Research Campaign professor of epidemiology at the Institute of Cancer Research, said: 'It has been known for a long time that early sex and multiple partners were risk factors for cervical cancer.

'But now it appears that once a woman contracts the HPV virus it can stay with her for ever. People think most infections are transient but now it appears once you have got the infection it may stay with you for life.

'A woman's sexual past when she was a teenager may come back to haunt her when she is in her 50s or older when she has been in a monogamous marriage for years.'

Professor Peto claims that up to half of British women will contract the human papilloma virus during their lifetime. One in five of these will develop the most severe cervical abnormalities and about half of these infected women will eventually develop cervical cancer if they are not regularly screened.

While in most cases the virus appears to vanish after a few months or years, it may be hiding, undetectable in the cells of the cervix, Professor Peto said.

Once a woman has the virus it can come back at any time. What triggers the virus to reactivate is not known, although cigarette smoking certainly increases the risk. His research shows that having numerous sexual partners increases the risk of catching HPV.

It is how long the virus has been in a woman's body, and whether she smokes, that increases the chance of it developing into cervical cancer. Teenage girls who are promiscuous are therefore at particularly high risk of catching the disease and suffering potentially life-threatening health problems in later life.

The Government is about to carry out trials to see if HPV testing should be introduced as part of the National Screening Programme, but Professor Peto believes these tests may not be able to detect all cases of the virus.

Earlier this week, scientists warned that the sexually transmitted disease chlamydia is strongly linked to cervical cancer.

Meanwhile, British scientists have just begun trials of a vaccine aimed at giving patients immunity against HPV. The vaccine is the result of a ten-year research programme by the Cancer Research Campaign and the Imperial Cancer Research Fund.

Twenty-four women will take part in the trial, which scientists hope will reveal precisely how much vaccine is needed to protect against the virus. The results are expected 18 months, but it is likely to be another ten years before a vaccine is widely available.

Professor Peto believes children as young as 13 should be vaccinated against the HPV virus.

'HPV vaccination before sexual activity begins may be necessary to achieve the long-term aim of preventing cervical cancer by eliminating the infection that causes it,' he said.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

