TITLE	Pill warning to women with cancer in the family

by JAMES CHAPMAN, Daily Mail

Young women with a family history of breast cancer could significantly increase their risk of developing the disease if they take the Pill, a study suggests.

Researchers found that women under 30 with an inherited genetic mutation linked to breast tumours had an increased risk of almost a third if they took oral contraceptives.

Women of any age with the gene fault who took the Pill for five years or more had a 33 per cent increased risk of breast cancer.

The effect was associated with the gene BRCA1, which raises the lifetime risk of getting breast cancer from about 8 per cent to as much as 85 per cent.

About one woman in 800 has a fault in BRCA1 but fewer than 50 per cent of those in high-risk families volunteer to be tested for the defect.

Doctors say that for these women any factors that might further increase their risk are particularly important.

Among the general population, long-term use of the Pill has been linked with a modest increase in the risk of breast cancer.

However, it has also been associated with a decrease in the risk of ovarian cancer, which women with the BRCA1 gene defect are also prone to develop.

They have a 16 to 60 per cent lifetime risk of developing ovarian cancer.

To work out if the benefits of taking the Pill were outweighed by the risks, researchers studied more than 1,300 women with the high-risk version of BRCA1 and its sister gene BRCA2 in 11 countries, including the UK.

The researchers, at the Sunnybrook and Woman's College Health Sciences Centre in Toronto and the University of Toronto, found that women who first used the Pill before 1975, when hormone doses were higher, were at particular risk.

There was no increase in breast cancer risk in BRCA2 mutation carriers, according to the study published today in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute.

The researchers suggest that among women with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, the lifetime risk of developing breast cancer can be altered by factors that affect hormone levels.

Some experts have long suspected that the risk could also be affected by medications that alter hormone levels, such as the Pill or HRT.

Based on their findings, the researchers conclude that for women carrying the BRCA1 mutation, age should be an important consideration when prescribing oral contraceptives.

Among older women with the genetic mutation, using the Pill appeared to reduce the risk of ovarian cancer by 60 per cent, they said.

'Oral contraceptive use after age 30 is not likely to increase the risk of breast cancer among the BRCA1 mutation carriers and can be used safely to reduce the risk of ovarian cancer,' they added.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

