TITLE	Cervical cancer: the facts

by CHARLOTTE HARDING, femail.co.uk

Last updated at 11:43 01 February 2005

It's perhaps one of the least known about type of cancer, but contrary to popular thought, cervical cancer is the second most common cancer in women worldwide.

To help you become aware of the the essential facts you need to know about the disease, how to protect yourself and possible treatments, read our comprehensive guide to cervical cancer below

How common is cervical cancer? In the UK it is the most common type of cancer in women under 35. Around 3,450 new cases are diagnosed in Britain each year.

What causes it? Researchers believe sexually transmitted viruses cause the cervix to begin the changes that lead to cancer. The Human Papilloma Virus (HPA) is implicated in the vast majority of cases.

Who is most at risk? You are more at risk if you began having sex before the age of 18 and if you have had many sexual partners. You are also at more risk if your partner began having sex at a young age, has had many sexual partners or has had a sexual relationship with someone who had cervical cancer.

Smokers are also more at risk, although it is not clear how or why. The risk increases with the number of cigarettes a woman smokes each day and with the number of years she has smoked. Women whose mothers were given the drug diethylstilbestrol during pregnancy, to prevent miscarriage, are also more at risk.

What are the warning signs? One of the most dangerous aspects of cervical cancer is that the pre-cancerous changes of the cervix are usually not painful. Symptoms only usually appear when the abnormal cervical cells become cancerous and invade nearby tissues. Once this has happened the most common symptom is abnormal bleeding, either between periods or after sex. Bleeding after the menopause and increased vaginal discharge are also symptoms.

Who should have a smear? Any woman who is sexually active should have a smear test every three to five years. The test is free and can be carried out by your GP. You can ask for the test to be performed by a female doctor or nurse if you prefer.

What does the test involve? The test is quick and painless. A specially shaped wooden spatula is wiped over the cells of the cervix and a sample is put onto a glass slide for laboratory analysis. You will be sent the results within six weeks.

What if the smear is abnormal? If there are any concerns over the smear, a repeat smear is organised. If there are still concerns, a procedure called a colposcopy will be carried out, to check the cervix for abnormal areas.

The doctor uses a microscope to look at the cervix, then may coat the cervix in a solution which turns normal cells brown and abnormal cells white or yellow. The doctor may remove a small amount of cervical tissue for examination. This is called a biopsy.

How easy is cervical cancer to treat? Cervical cancer is a slow-growing cancer. If it is caught early it can usually be treated successfully.

What treatment is available? When pre-cancerous changes in the cervix require treatment, doctors may use cryosurgery (freezing), cauterisation (burning), or laser surgery to destroy the abnormal area. These processes do not harm the surrounding area.

Abnormal tissue can also be removed by a procedure called a cone-biopsy. This involves a surgeon taking a cone-shaped section of the cervix for examination while the woman is under anaesthetic.

 Treatment for cervical cancer itself usually involves surgery and radiotherapy. Chemotherapy may also be used.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

