TITLE	What's in your make-up's make-up?

by ROSALIND RYAN, femail.co.uk

There is a growing amount of evidence to show that your make-up and skin-care routine could actually cause a range of conditions from skin allergies to cancer.

Use our guide below to discover the chemicals that could be responsible, then read about the chemical that is currently causing the most concern and how to keep yourself beautiful without the risk to your health.

Which chemicals pose the biggest risk?

It can be difficult to decipher all the ingredients on the labels of your make-up or skin-care products.

To help make the task easier, just follow our at-a-glance guide to the most common harmful chemicals below.

If you find any of the ingredients in your cosmetics or beauty products, you can decide whether or not to leave them out of your make-up pack.

Acetone: used as a nail polish remover and in perfumes. It is toxic if swallowed and can irritate the lungs.

Alkylphenol ethoxylates: used to help produce lather and penetrate the skin. Found in shampoos and hair colours. It can disrupt your hormones, build up in body fat and is toxic to fish once washed into the environment. Look for nonylphenol or octyphenol.

Coal tar: used as an artificial colouring. Found in blushers, eyeliners and mascaras. In sensitive people, can trigger nausea, headaches, moodswings and has produced cancer in animal experiments. 

Formaldehyde: used as a disinfectant, preservative and fungicide. Found in deodorants and nail varnish. It is a suspected cancer-causing chemical, may trigger asthma in sensitive individuals and can damage DNA. Look for formalin, formal or methyl aldehyde.

Isopropyl alcohol: used as a solvent to help colours mix together. Found in lipsticks and cream blushers. It is linked to neurological damage and may cause the body tissues to be more susceptible to cancer. Look for words such as propyl, methyl, butyl, benzene and styrene.

Para-phenylenediamine (PPD):

used in dark hair dyes and some temporary tattoos. It is linked to a higher incidence of bladder cancer, scalp conditions and skin allergies.

Phthalates: see 'latest research' section below.

Parabens: used as a preservative. Found in moisturisers, cream foundations, cream eye shadows and toothpaste. Parabens are oestrogen mimics, increasing risk of breast cancer. The combined effect of parabens in different products is still unknown. Look out for alkyl parahydroxy, benzoates such as butyl, methyl, propl or isobutyl paraben.

Toluene: used as a solvent. Found in nail varnishes. Studies have found links to miscarriages, liver damage, and damage to central nervous system. Look out for toluol or methylbenzene.

Xylene: used as a solvent. Found in lacquers and nail varnishes. Can cause liver damage, skin allergies and can be addictive at high concentrations. Look out for xylol or dimethylbenzene.

What is the major chemical of concern at the moment?

A recent study by the Women's Environmental Network in conjunction with the Swedish Study for Nature Conservation found that four out of five popular beauty products they tested contained chemicals called phthalates - pronounced 'thalates'.

They found the harmful chemicals in products such as the fragrance Poison by Christian Dior, hairsprays from Boots and L'Oreal and also in a number of antiperspirant deodorants. They are used to slow down the rate perfumes and hairsprays evaporate and to keep the fragrance lingering. They are also used in nail varnishes to prevent chipping.

Phthalates have been found to harm the liver, kidneys, lungs and reproductive system, especially developing sex organs in males. It can also cause premature breast development in girls, low sperm counts in men and cause the testicles to waste away.

Two phthalates are already banned in the European Union from being used in chewable plastic toddlers' toys because of the risk to developing reproductive organs. But women could still be absorbing a range of different phthalates through their beauty products and risking the health of their unborn children.

Helen Lynn, health coordinator for the WEN, says, 'Chemicals that affect animal and humans in this way should not be in cosmetics at all. We should be able to choose products and know they are safe, not have to worry whether they contain risky chemicals.'

A spokesman for the Cosmetics, Toiletries and Perfumes Association says, 'Phthalates have been extensively studied and all data shows that consumer exposure from use in cosmetic and personal care products is far below the levels that could cause adverse health effects.'

However, an American study two years ago found that every single man and woman they studied contained traces of dibutyl phthalate. The levels of this phthalate were particularly high in women between the ages of 20 and 45, largely due to the fact they use more cosmetic products than men.

Scientists are now trying to determine whether high levels in humans will have the same results as the animal experiments - defective sex organs for example - but campaign groups are already warning pregnant women to steer clear of beauty products containing phthalates to cut their risk of exposure.

The WEN is now campaigning for manufacturers to remove phthalates from all their products and for the EU to unconditionally ban all phthalates from cosmetics.

For more information and a list of all the products tested containing phthalates, visit www.wen.org.uk or www.nottopretty.org and follow the links for the Pretty Nasty report.

Are there any chemical free beauty products?

Fortunately, there are a number of cosmetics and beauty products currently available that do not contain any chemicals.

Green People and Neways are two of the leading manufacturers of chemical-free, people-friendly products. They make a point of using natural, organic products that are not harmful to either your health or the environment.

Green People produces skin, hair and body, sun protection and home cleaning products but not cosmetics. Neways produces beauty products - including cosmetics - and also a range of home and car care products! Both companies also produce dietary supplements. Visit www.greenpeople.co.uk or www.neways.co.uk for more information and to go shopping.

Neal's Yard Remedies has carved out a deserved reputation for producing quality holistic and organic products over the last two decades. They have a number of stores throughout Britain but you can also shop online or use their mail order service. Visit their website on www.nealsyardremedies.com for more details.

Other brands that embrace the natural and ethical approach to beauty products are REN and Organic Blue. REN is available by mail order. Call 020 7935 2323 for a catalogue. Organic Blue is available in some larger Sainsbury's stores or by via mail order. Call 020 8206 2066 for their catalogue.

The Body Shop is one of the most established producers of natural beauty products, but check the ingredients on some of their products. Phthalates were recently found in one of their deodorants in the WEN study.

You can also find natural beauty products in many department stores. Cariad, Jurlique, Dr Hauschka and Liz Earle all produce a range of cosmetics and beauty products that are free from toxins and harmful chemicals.

All these companies also have websites where you can order products. As if you needed another excuse to go shopping...!

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

