TITLE	New treatment makes childhood cancers 'disappear'

A year ago, they were both fighting for their lives.

Schoolgirls Katrina Turley and Shahanara Begum had each been diagnosed with a rare and deadly form of cancer and the future looked desperately bleak. Then scientists decided to try to cure them with an experimental technique involving transfusions of donor blood cells engineered to fight their tumours.

Astonishingly, the treatment, pioneered by British experts, was a success - and both girls are now free of cancer. Doctors said their tumours ' literally disappeared' from scans as the modified cells attacked them.

'The effect of the transfusions was almost instant,' said Katrina's mother Racheal. 'She started eating a lot better and within three weeks she was so well that we were able to go skiing in France. 'That would have been unthinkable beforehand. We are just delighted.'

Experts believe the girls' stories could offer hope to many cancer sufferers. Katrina, 13, from Rhewl, near Ruthin, North Wales, was born with cystic fibrosis and had a liver transplant at the age of 11. Shahanara, eight, from Coventry, was born with severe jaundice and had a liver transplant when she was just ten months old.

Both girls developed cancer of the lymph system, a feared side- effect of organ transplant medication. Doctors were then faced with the agonising decision whether to continue with the drugs or stop them and risk rejection of the new livers.

Instead, they decided to use immune cells from unrelated blood donors to boost the girls' immune response to the cancer without affecting their new organs. Shahanara's father, Mujibar Rahman, a shop owner, said: 'We had to rely on the doctors when they said they wanted to try an experimental treatment.

'Thank goodness it worked and the cancer has gone. 'Shahanara is fine now, and she's going to school like any normal little girl. We feel very lucky.'

Katrina's mother, a psychiatric health worker, said: 'Katrina was losing weight and things didn't look good at all. We knew the treatment was experimental, but we talked it through with her consultant at Birmingham Children's Hospital and decided to go ahead.' Developed by scientists at Edinburgh-University with funding from Cancer Research UK, the treatment centres on blood cells called killer T cells.

Both girls had four infusions of T cells over a four-week period. Dr Dorothy Crawford, who led the research, said: 'These children, for whom conventional treatment hadn't worked, I imagine would have died.' Dr Crawford and her team screened dozens of blood samples until they found two that were ideal matches for Shahanara's and Katrina's blood.

They then isolated T cells from the samples and grew them in a laboratory alongside the virus responsible for triggering the girls' cancers - the Epstein-Barr virus, which causes glandular fever. 'We cultured the cells for three months with the virus, essentially to train them to do the right thing once they were transfused,' said Dr Crawford.

Of eight patients who have had the treatment, five have gone into complete remission and one into partial remission. The treatment has failed in two patients. It is estimated the treatment costs about the same as a course of chemotherapy - about &pound;5,000.

Cancer Research UK has built up a national bank of T cells from donated blood. Dr Crawford said: 'We have created a bank of cells from people with 100 different tissue types.'

 Doctors are now planning a three-year trial - involving 80 patients - of the treatment as a first-line therapy for patients with lymphatic cancer. Experts hope it may eventually be used for other forms of cancer.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

