TITLE	Can a spray beat breast cancer?

by ANASTASIA STEPHENS, Daily Mail

A new hormone spray could dramatically reduce the chance of women at high risk of breast cancer developing the disease.

Women who are genetically predisposed to cancer currently have only the radical preventative option of having their breasts removed.

But American researchers say Libra, a nasal spray, could offer a less drastic option. Combining a drug called deslorelin with small amounts of oestrogen and testosterone, the spray 'switches off ' the ovaries and oestrogensensitive tissue.

'The ovaries produce most of the body's oestrogen,' explains Dr Malcolm Pike, Professor of preventive medicine at the University of Southern California.

'This hormone is a major trigger for breast cancer and is a particular problem for high-risk women.

'By shutting the ovaries down, Libra stops the body producing oestrogen, so lowers the cancer risk,' he says. 'However, the spray also contains the minimum amount of oestrogen and testosterone, so prevents a premature menopause and problems such as osteoporosis.'

Every year in Britain, 12,000 women die from breast cancer - the second biggest killer after lung cancer. Along with ovarian cancer, it is triggered by the action of oestrogen which accumulates with age.

Women with mutations in genes known as BRCA1 and BRCA2 have around an 80 per cent risk of developing the cancer, and these mutations account for up to 10 per cent of all cases. While the cancer-fighting drug Tamoxifen reduces the risk of breast cancer in many women, it hasn't helped women with BRCA mutations.

Because the cancer risk for such women is so high, some are opting to have their breasts or ovaries removed in their 30s or 40s in an attempt to beat their internal 'cancer clock'.

The spray is expected to be widely available in three years' time, could offer a much less severe alternative.

'Pilot trials have demonstrated that suppressing the ovaries while adding back minimal levels of sex hormones may be an effective preventive treatment for young women at high risk of breast cancer,' says Anna-Marie Daniels, head of clinical trials at Balance Pharmaceuticals, which makes Libra.

The therapy also reduces the density of breast tissue. 'By making the tissue lighter, it enables doctors to spot tumours more easily during routine scans,' she adds.

Women could use Libra as a cancer-preventative treatment in their 20s or 30s before they have families, because it works like a contraceptive but does not damage long-term fertility.

'The spray suppresses ovarian function, but as soon as you stop using it, the ovaries begin secreting hormones again - fertility is normally restored within a month.'

Because the medication is given as a spray, the hormones and drugs bypass the liver, are rapidly absorbed and are effective at lower doses.

Libra could also help around two million women in Britain who suffer from fibroids and endometriosis - when tissue lining the womb grows abnormally around the pelvis - the leading causes of infertility.

Currently, women rely on the contraceptive Pill or intrauterine devices such as Mirena to suppress menstruation.

There are also drugs that shut down the ovaries causing premature menopause. But, unlike the spray, they do not replace sex hormones so can lead to osteoporosis and hot flushes.

Often, the most common treatment is surgery, but sometimes the condition can recur.

'We've seen a universal improvement in women with endometriosis and fibroids who have used Libra,' says Anna-Marie Daniels. 'Within three months, they experienced a reduction in pain and 80 per cent were completely relieved of symptoms.

'Importantly, Libra causes abnormal tissue to regress and prevents further tissue from growing.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

