TITLE	Is there a link between breast cancer and the Pill?

A lot of research has been done on any possible link between breast cancer and the Pill - by which I mean the combined contraceptive pill, which contains the hormones oestrogen and progesterone.

Overall, it would appear that women who are taking the contraceptive pill are at a slightly increased risk of getting breast cancer compared to other women, the same age, who are not on the Pill.

The exact figure for the increased risk varies between different studies, but has been put as high as 24 per cent. This may sound alarming, but it is important to remember that in young women, especially those under 35, breast cancer is rare, so a 24 per cent increase in risk doesn't count for very much at all.

It only becomes more meaningful in older women, over 35, and especially over 40, who are at increased risk of breast cancer simply because of their age. This increase is for women currently taking the Pill. Once you stop the Pill, the increase in risk gradually falls, and 10 years later it is back to normal again.

These are only general statistics. It does appear that in women already at increased risk of breast cancer, because of their family history, the Pill may cause a slightly bigger increase in risk. One research study has suggested that in women who have the BRCA1 gene (who have at least a 50 per cent chance of developing breast cancer at some time in their life) the Pill can increase the risk by a further third.

It is important to remember that the Pill has lots of benefits other than providing reliable contraception. It can help relieve pain and heavy bleeding at period time, and also give a regular cycle. It also helps reduce the risk of ovarian cysts and ovarian cancer.

So for most young women, it remains an excellent choice. But in those with a strong history of breast cancer, it might be wise to discuss alternatives before choosing the Pill.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

