TITLE	Could natural medicine help my wife recover from cancer?

There a number of nutrients that are essential for blood-building. Perhaps the most important nutrient in this respect is the mineral iron.

Iron is essential for the manufacture of a substance contained in the red blood cells called haemoglobin which transports oxygen around the body. Iron deficiency is common after treatments such as chemotherapy and radiotherapy.

Iron is what is known as an 'oxidising agent', and can have damaging effects if taken in excess. For this reason, I always think it is best to have iron levels measured in the body before starting treatment. Probably the best way to determine iron levels in the body is with a blood test.

The most commonly used test is known as the 'serum iron', which essentially measures the level of iron in the blood stream. However, it is far more useful to measure the level of something called 'ferritin', which gives a good indication of the overall level of iron in the body.

If your wife's ferritin level is on the low side of normal, it is very likely that she will benefit from iron supplementation. A typical recommended dose is 100 mg of iron per day, though this may need to be adjusted according to changes in the ferritin level. Quite often, iron supplementation can cause gastrointestinal symptoms, the most common of which is constipation.

It is well known that vitamin C enhances the absorption of iron, thereby reducing the amount of iron that needs to be taken in the long term. The less iron is taken, the less risk there is of side-effects such as constipation. Your wife might benefit from taking 250 - 500 mg of vitamin C with each dose of iron.

Other nutrients which have important roles in blood formation include vitamin B12 and folic acid. These nutrients, when used in combination, are generally very safe and their levels do not necessarily need to be measured in the body before starting treatment. I recommend that your wife takes 1000 mcg each of folic acid and vitamin B12 each day.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

