TITLE	Me and my operation: skin cancer

by ANGELA BROOKS, Daily Mail

The NHS undertakes 61,000 skin cancer operations every year, ranging from minor procedures to those needing reconstructive surgery. Here, Jacqueline Booth, 51, a parttime retail adviser who lives in York with her retired partner, Dave Kempson, tells ANGELA BROOKS about her operation and her surgeon explains the procedure.

THE PATIENT 

Two years ago, I noticed an almost colourless, pearly-looking, dimpled spot on the tip of my nose. It didn't hurt and it didn't change - but it didn't go away either.

Maybe it was ignorance but it didn't bother me terribly. It wasn't that noticeable, and with a little bit of make-up, it was completely concealed. But when I mentioned it to my GP early in 2001, she said it was probably worth having a skin specialist look at it to be on the safe side.

I was first seen by a hospital dermatologist who referred me to Martin Telfer, a surgeon at York District Hospital. He took one look at the spot and said it was a basal cell carcinoma, also known as a rodent ulcer.

He said this was a cancer, but not the type like melanoma which can spread everywhere. It tends to stay where it is but will eat away and damage surrounding tissue, so it does have to come out.

He drew all the way around it and then gave me a mirror to point out how much he would need to take away - about the size of a 10p piece and said he would cut down to my nose cartilage.

He then said he would use skin from my forehead - a good colour and texture match - to replace the skin removed from my nose.

This involved peeling down an inchwide strip of skin from my hairline to the inner corner of my eyebrow - a flap - then, leaving the eyebrow bit still attached, flipping it over and stretching it down to the tip of my nose. It would be stitched around the spot where they had removed the lesion.

This tissue bridge, joining the edge of the eyebrow to the tip of the nose, would stay in place for about six weeks - so that the blood and oxygen from the forehead flap feeds the area on the end of the nose.

This allows the transplanted tissue to grow properly. They would then do a mini-op to detach the flap six weeks later. I went into York District Hospital for surgery the following month.

My forehead looked red after the operation and like I had a patch sewn half-way around my nose but the bridge part was bandaged and was neat and clean looking so I didn't look quite as bad as I expected.

The following day, Mr Telfer told me that the operation had gone well, the lesion had been sent off for testing - and that I could go home.

I returned to hospital to have the forehead stitches and all of the stitches from my nose removed the following week. I then returned each week to have the bridge dressings cleaned and changed.

I was given the all clear seven weeks later when I went in for the tidying-up procedure. It was here that the flap was detached, a procedure done under local anaesthetic.

They simply snipped both ends, shaped these edges to the eyebrow and then around my nose and put a few stitches into both spots. These stitches were removed the following week.

It's now been a year and a half since my operation and all that shows is a hairline scar on my forehead and a slight colour change around the stitch lines on my nose - hardly noticeable with a little make-up. Mr Telfer said I shouldn't be paranoid in the sun. I've taken sensible precautions and now wear a factor 30 sunscreen and a visor when out.

When I discovered I had skin cancer, I thought: 'Why me?' I'm not particularly lightskinned, I don't recall being sunburnt, I've never worked outside or lived in a hot climate and I've never been a sun-worshipper - all of the risk factors. But I've just had to accept that this was one of those things.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

