TITLE	How fruit helps a child grow up to beat cancer

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

An apple a day may keep cancer at bay, especially if eaten during childhood, a study has found.

Those who eat plenty of fruit as youngsters may be protecting themselves against the disease and other illnesses in later life.

A study of nearly 4,000 adults found those who had dipped into the fruit bowl - even 60 years ago - had lower death rates than those who did not.

It is the first report to investigate whether the amount of fruit and vegetables consumed in the early years can affect the chances of getting cancer.

While the findings show fruit is protective, there was no evidence that eating more vegetables will help cut the risk as adults.

The researchers checked the records of almost 4,000 adults 60 years after they had taken part in a survey of diet and health.

The original survey was part of a wider investigation into the diet, health and social circumstances of 1,350 families in 16 rural and urban areas of England and Scotland between 1937 and 1939.

The families completed a week's household food inventory which gave details of fruit and vegetable consumption.

Using NHS records, the researchers successfully traced almost 4,000 men and women who had been children at the time of the original survey.

They looked at deaths and incidence of cancer in the group up to the end of July 2000.

Up until then, 483 cases of cancer had been diagnosed, the most common being lung and bowel cancers in men and breast, lung and bowel cancers in women.

Researchers from the Social and Public Health Sciences Unit in London took into account age, gender and energy intake.

They discovered that the higher the fruit consumption during childhood, the less likely the risk of developing cancer as an adult.

Increased fruit intake was associated with lower death rates from all causes, according to the report in the Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health.

Children eating the highest amount of fruit in the 1930s were consuming around three ounces a day while those with the least healthy diets ate virtually none.

Surprisingly, there was no link between cooked vegetables and cancer risk.

This might be due to the fact that in the 1930s it was common to boil vegetables for up to an hour, which would have wiped out their vitamin content.

It was not clear exactly how fruits protected against illnesses, although their antioxidant vitamins and fibre were thought to help.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

