TITLE	Aspirin 'can cut cancer risk'

by DAVID HARDING, Metro

Fresh evidence that aspirin is a cancerfighting wonderdrug has emerged as a study suggests it could cut the risk of mouth, throat and oesophagus tumours by two-thirds.

Scientists have already found the painkiller may prevent bowel and lung cancer, as well as arthritis and heart disease.

But they now believe it also protects against other common tumours and have hailed their research among the 'greatest finds in the history of drug discovery'.

Although experts hope it will play an important role in stopping the disease in the future, they advised people not to start popping aspirins daily until research was completed into possible side-effects.

New analysis of 2,744 hospital patients found those who took the painkiller for at least five years had just a third of the risk of developing cancers in the 'aerodigestive tract' which connects the mouth and the stomach.

'We believe aspirin may take effect by acting on an enzyme called cyclooxygenase-2,' said Dr Cristina Bosetti, who led the Italian research team in Milan.

The study combined and reanalysed data from three separate studies involving 965 cancer patients and 1,779 people who were in hospital for other conditions.

Many of the aspirin users were taking it

Victim: George Harrison died from throat cancer in 2002

after being diagnosed with other problems such as heart disease.

But scientists believe that, if people took the drug earlier, it could be possible to achieve even stronger protective effects.

Dr Richard Sullivan of Cancer Research UK said: 'Aspirin has to count as one of the greatest finds in the history of drug discovery. This study adds to the evidence of a significant protective effect.'

The findings, published in the British Journal of Cancer, follow a study of 14,000 women in New York last year indicated long-term aspirin use could more than halve lung cancer risks.

There are 7,250 cases of oesophagus cancer and 4,000 cases of mouth cancer in Britain every year. Throat cancer, which killed George Harrison last year, affects 2,200 people a year.

Cancer of the oesophagus - commonly known as the gullet - claimed the life of Inspector Morse star John Thaw last year at the age of 60.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

