TITLE	Double op for cancer gene patient

by ANGELA EPSTEIN, Daily Mail

Having lost both her parents to cancer before she reached her mid-20s, Vicky Lee was determined that her children would never be in the same position.

But she could not have envisaged the drastic measures she would have to take to ensure that she would be around to watch them grow up.

At the age of only 35, Mrs Lee has undergone both a hysterectomy and mastectomy to eradicate the risk of contracting ovarian and breast cancer.

She felt it was the only option after discovering that she carries a defective gene which gives her an 85 per cent chance of developing both cancers.

At the age of 31 she had a hysterectomy and followed that with a mastectomy six months ago. Mrs Lee, a research associate for Manchester University, said: 'My daughter Hannah is 12 and her sister, Katie, is nine.

'I pray that by the time they reach their 20s, experts will have discovered some other way to defeat breast cancer than by such invasive surgery.'

After watching her mother, Rona, die of ovarian cancer 12 years ago at the age of 47, Mrs Lee began having annual abdominal scans at the Family History Clinic in Manchester.

At the time, little was known about the faulty BRCA 1 gene which can cause breast and ovarian cancer.

As research developed, Mrs Lee was informed that her mother's ovarian cancer had been caused by a defective gene and that she had a 50/50 chance of inheriting it. In turn, her own daughters run the same risk.

'I decided at first to rely on annual scans,' she said. 'But two years later a scan revealed a 3cm cyst on my left ovary. Though it turned out to be harmless, I was so worried I went to be gene tested and learned it was positive two weeks later.

'I decided I couldn't afford to put off a hysterectomy any longer. I wasn't concerned about losing my femininity. I knew I didn't want any more children.

'I had been so close to my mother and had also lost my father, David, to oesophageal cancer at the age of 34. I couldn't afford for my children to lose me.'

With the support of her husband, Darryl, 42, the co-director of a property investment company, Mrs Lee had the surgery in January 1999 at the Alexandra Hospital in Cheadle, Greater Manchester.

However, her consultant, Dr Paul Donnai, explained that the hysterectomy had solved only 'half the problem'.

Mrs Lee was told that only a mastectomy could rule out breast cancer, since the defective gene still left her with an 85 per cent chance of developing an aggressive tumour.

Mrs Lee, from Hale, Greater Manchester, eventually decided to have a mastectomy in September last year.

The surgery carried out at Manchester's Alexandra Hospital involved removing both breasts - though preserving the outer skin - and placing tissue expanders in their place, where saline has been injected to conserve Mrs Lee's figure. This will be replaced with silicone.

'Like any woman I wondered what my husband would think of me,' she said. 'But he has been a pillar of strength and said he wasn't bothered about my shape.'

Mr Lee said: 'She is as feminine and as lovely as she always was - and the surgeon has done a wonderful job.

'She has since been on holiday and worn skimpy tops and bikinis. It's so easy to support a woman who has remained so positive throughout.'

Mrs Lee is supporting a campaign to build a &pound;10million breast cancer prevention centre in Manchester.

The campaign, which is being run by the Genesis Appeal and whose patrons include Cherie Blair and Joan Collins, aims to have the centre up and running within two years. It would be the first centre of its kind in Europe.

Mrs Lee added: 'I have been very open with my daughters about the surgery and Hannah even said in a matter of fact way that she would be having the same operation when she was older.

'But we have to build this centre to stop her and so many other women having to face that decision.

'Manchester has such an incredible team of experts based in the city and I feel so fortunate that they were able to help me. They need this centre to enhance their work and one day eliminate breast cancer.'

For further details about the appeal, call Genesis on 0845 7045453.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

