TITLE	Fruit and veg 'cut cancer risk'

One in 10 cancers in the western world could be due to people not eating enough fruit and vegetables, experts have warned.

A working group of 22 scientists from 10 countries carried out a research review, co-ordinated by the World Health Organisation's International Agency of Research on Cancer (IARC).

At a week-long meeting in France, the group concluded that 'a higher intake of fruits and vegetables is associated with a lower risk of various types of cancer'.

And they estimated that in the west, one in ten cancers was due to insufficient consumption of fruit and vegetables.

The experts said the clearest evidence of a cancer-protective effect of eating more fruit and vegetables was for cancer of the stomach and lungs.

Similarly, they say, 'A higher intake of vegetables probably reduces the incidence of cancers of the oesophagus and colon-rectum.'

Professor Paul Kleihues, director of the IARC, says, 'In many studies there is a fairly consistent association of higher levels of fruit and vegetables.

'This plus the evidence of beneficial effects of fruit and vegetables on other major diseases, such as heart disease, indicates that individuals and communities should increase their intake of these foods.

'This is an important message for governments, the food industry and consumers.'

Working Group chairman Professor Tony McMichael, of the Australian National University, said it was difficult to get conclusive evidence of a link between cancer and diet.

This was because people's food consumption could be accompanied by factors such as smoking and drinking alcohol.

However, he said the pattern of findings for cancers overall was persuasive.

'Long term follow-up studies of many thousands of patients are now providing higher quality information about these relationships,' he added.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

