TITLE	How to prevent prostate cancer

Doctors are warning that all men should now be on the look out for symptoms of prostate cancer. Here are some other health tips that could help prevent the disease.

You can help to protect yourself from the disease by following these seven rules:

Cut down on meat: Prostate cancer - a hormone-based disease - may be strongly linked to the consumption of meat which contains higher levels of hormone-disrupting chemicals. Try to eat meat no more than three times a week. It's best to eat white meat, and lean cuts of red meat with equal portions of fish. Opt for hormone-free organic cuts where possible.

Don't fry food: Diets which are high in dairy products - milk, cheese, butter and saturated animal fats - are also associated with a higher incidence of prostate cancer. Avoid trans-fats, found in margarine, vegetable shortening, and processed vegetable oils. If you are overweight, start a diet to reduce your risk.

Eat more fruit: Eat five to nine daily servings of organic fresh fruit and vegetables. Eat plenty of rich red tomato sauces. Try to include soya in your diet - soya milk, tofu or soya yoghurts. These are all high in antioxidants, which protect our cells against the damaging effects of free radicals and can help prevent cancers.

Take vitamins: Recommended daily supplements for prostate protection include: Vitamin A, C, D and; Selenium and Flaxseed oil.

Stop smoking: Giving up cigarettes will also protect your zinc levels.

Avoid using garden fertilisers and pesticides: Many these contain hormone-disrupting chemicals.

Exercise: Because very little research has been conducted into prostate cancer, the power of exercise, though known to be beneficial in boosting the body's immune system, is still largely uncertain. What scientists do know is that exercise can prevent cancer because it enhances natural immunity by improving circulation, blood pressure and the efficiency and strength of the heart.

It also improves the antioxidant defences of our cells, which can help to counter the potentially damaging effects of oxidants, and which can lead to the genetic mutations that lie behind the development of cancers.

For more information contact the charity for male cancers, Everyman on: 0800 7319468.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

