TITLE	Now living by airports can give you cancer

by ANDREA PERRY, femail.co.uk

It's not only flying that can damage your health, now people living in communities close to airports are being warned that they could be at greater risk from cancer caused by pollution from jet exhausts.

Plane Truth, a report by Transport 2000 says that people and the environment face serious threats from the rapidly-growing aviation industry, including more noise and climate change gases.

Airports produce large amounts of toxic emissions that are a threat to human health, including nitrogen oxides and volatile organic compounds (VOCs).

Research in the United States has linked VOCs generated by SeaTac airport in Chicago to elevated rates of cancer in the vicinity.

Health workers also found high numbers of cases of the brain cancer called glioblastoma. Normally fatal, it ends the life of only one in 25,000 people, but the city of SeaTac which has a population of 23,000, had experienced at least five deaths from the disease.

The cluster of cases were at the north end of the airport, the direction the wind usually blows. Stories of families and circles of friends being decimated by cancers were also common in the area.

Heathrow Airport is already one of the UK's main producers of VOCs but there has been no research into the implications for people living near airports in the UK.

It is not easy to obtain data on toxic emissions produced by UK airports, as the government's postion is that aviation contributes very little to local air pollution.

A spokesman for Transport 2000 said: 'The question is why hasn't any research been done. No-one seems to be taking this threat seriously and we really should be asking more questions about the affects on health caused by the aviation industry.'

In America researchers, who carried out a study on SeaTac Airport in Chicago found that carbon monoxide registered above federal guidelines and added to the risk of cancer.

Other airport produced toxic pollutants are highly suspected to cause many other illnesses such as, birth defects, respiratory illnesses, liver damage, and heart diseases.

Aviation emissions are transmitted by a spray that is dispersed overhead, that cannot be filtered out by our lungs and is directly transmitted into our blood stream. The mist is a sticky substance that attaches to vegetation and is also ingested and drank.

Transport 2000 predict that by 2015 air travel will more than double 1995 levels and if current trends continue, by 2050 passenger-kilometres flown could grow to between five and nine times the figure for 1995.

Professor John Whitelegg, who researched the report, highlighted the need for more stringent standards on noise and emissions around airports, better monitoring of the effects of air travel and more promotion of the alternatives such as rail for short-haul flights.

He called for an environmental charge on air travel based on emissions and the ending of tax exemption on aviation fuel.

The report said that World Health Organisation noise limits are regularly exceeded, with one in eight people in the UK affected by noise pollution from aircraft.

It claimed that by 2050 aviation is set to become one of the biggest single sources of greenhouse gas emissions with around 10 per cent of climate change directly attributable to aircraft.

Stephen Joseph, Director of Transport 2000, said: 'Aviation has got away with too much for too long. People and the environment will pay the price if we let air travel continue to soar.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

