TITLE	Pill 'can double risk of cancer'

Women who take the contraceptive pill could be doubling their risk of suffering cervical cancer, a major scientific study has found.

It concluded that the longer a woman stays on the Pill, the greater her chances of suffering the disease, which affects around 3,200 in Britain every year and claims 1,300 lives.

The findings are likely to heighten concerns over the long-term threat to women's health posed by oral contraceptives, which have already been linked to increased risk of stroke and breast cancer.

But last night the Department of Health and medical experts urged the three million women in Britain using the Pill not to panic.

Women are advised to consult their GPs if worried and ensure they go for cervical screening every two to three years.

Generally, women are thought to have a one in 80 chance of developing cancer of the cervix - the neck of the womb - during their lifetime.

The review, which involved 28 studies and 12,500 women with the disease, found that taking the Pill for five years or less increases this risk by 10 per cent, meaning the cancer may affect one in 72.

Taking the Pill for between five and nine years raises the risk by 60 per cent, increasing the odds to one in 50. Women who have been on the Pill for ten years or more have twice the risk of developing cervical cancer, with odds of one in 40.

The review, commissioned by the World Health Organisation, did not specify which type of contraceptive pills were taken, although scientists say most women are likely to have been on the most commonly prescribed combined oestrogen and progestagen pills.

British and French scientists colhealthlaborated to examine research in 24 countries for the study, which is published today in The Lancet.

Lead researcher Dr Amy Berrington, of Cancer Research UK's epidemiology unit at the Radcliffe Infirmary in Oxford, said: 'This study shows that use of hormonal contraceptives for long periods of time may increase the risk of cervical cancer.

'We are advising women to talk to their GPs if they are worried, and certainly to accept invitations from the NHS to go for a smear test regularly, whether or not they are using the Pill.

The public implications of these findings largely depend on whether this risk remains long after use of hormonal contraceptives has stopped and this cannot be properly evaluated from published data.

'There is some evidence to suggest that the risk may drop after women stop using the Pill but further research is needed to confirm this.'

An international team of specialists has already begun a new assessment of the health risks which may remain after women give up the oral contraceptive.

The latest findings are the first to show that increased cervical cancer in users of the Pill is not simply due to infection with a sexually transmitted disease, the human papilloma virus.

Because women on the Pill are more likely not to use condoms with their partners it was thought they would have more exposure to the virus, which has been linked to cervical cancer.

The new study found that there was increased risk in Pill users whether or not they were infected with the virus.

Researchers cannot say why the Pill may raise the likelihood of suffering cervical cancer, which kills about a third of sufferers.

Doctors believe hormonal changes within the body caused by the Pill may be to blame.

Dr Lesley Walker, director of information at Cancer Research UK, said more research was vital to allow women to make an informed choice about contraception.

Previous research shows Pill users have a reduced chance of dying of cancer of the ovaries and womb lining and suffering conditions such as osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis and a range of gynaecological and breast problems.

On the other hand there is a very small rise in the average risk from heart disease and stroke due to blood clots.

A spokesman for the Department of Health said its experts had known for some time that long term use of the Pill gives a slightly higher risk of cervical cancer but the benefits outweigh the risks for most women.

He added: 'Information accompanying packets of the Pill has stated this for many years.

'Women who are worried by this report should not stop taking the Pill immediately but should arrange to talk to their GP.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

