TITLE	Painkillers 'cut breast cancer risk'

Women who take painkillers at least twice a week can halve their risk of breast cancer, scientists have said.

A study of more than 80,000 females found that over-the-counter drugs such as ibuprofen and aspirin dramatically cut the chance of developing the disease.

Regularly taking the drugs for five to nine years reduced participants' risk of developing breast cancer by a fifth, said Dr Randall Harris who led the study at Ohio State University. Extending the use to 10 or more years resulted in a reduction of 28%, and long term ibuprofen users cut the risk of breast cancer by about 50%.

"Our results showed a significant reduction of breast cancer among women who took non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs," Dr Harris said. "The evidence is compelling that relatively harmless and inexpensive compounds such as ibuprofen and aspirin, already used by millions, reduce the risk of breast cancer as well as other forms of cancer."

The anti-cancer effects of the drugs worked just as well on high risk women such as those who had a family history of the disease, he said.

Breast cancer is the most common form of the disease in Britain. It affects around one in 10 women in the UK in their lifetime, with an estimated 39,500 new cases and 13,000 deaths every year.

Dr Harris said aspirin and ibuprofen work as painkillers by reducing inflammation.

The same process also appears to block several key steps in the development of cancer including the spread of cancer cells.

The study in the US involved 80,741 post-menopausal women aged between 50 and 79 with no reported history of cancer. Of those, 1,392 were diagnosed with the cancer over the next four years.

The results were published in the proceedings from the Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

