TITLE	HRT patches may help prostate cancer

Hormone replacement therapy patches used by women to combat the effects of the menopause could provide a better treatment for men with prostate cancer, it was reported today.

Scientists at the Hammersmith Hospital and Imperial College, in London, found the patches caused fewer side effects and were preferred to more radical methods and hormone therapies commonly used to treat the disease.

Some 20 patients with advanced prostate cancer had a better quality of life using patches and their disease "regressed", the BBC reported.

Testosterone reduced

Hormone therapy to treat prostate cancer - one of the most common cancers among men - involves reducing the supply of the hormone testosterone, which can encourage the growth of cancerous cells.

Drugs are used to cut production of testosterone, and in some cases men have their testicles removed to achieve the same effect.

Side-effects of therapies can be severe, including osteoporosis, impotence and breast growth.

Previous trials to cut testosterone levels by giving prostate cancer sufferers the female hormone oestrogen have been abandoned due to the risk of blood clotting.

But the patches have proven more successful. In addition they are cheaper than current therapies and could save the NHS millions each year.

Paul Abel, one of the consultants leading the trial, said: "We're delighted with the results of this preliminary study.

"It holds real promise for prostate cancer sufferers giving an efficient, easy and cost-effective alternative to the currently available therapies, which can be painful, time-consuming and produce unwelcome side-effects.

"The beauty of patch therapy is that is not only leads to disease regression, it does so with far fewer side-effects.

"It is also flexible in that it can be removed at any time if necessary, for example should side-effects develop."

The number of men diagnosed with prostate cancer in the UK is increasing, according to Cancer Research UK.

Excluding non-melanoma skin cancer, prostate cancer is now the most common cancer in men, with 24,700 UK men diagnosed each year.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

