TITLE	Sunbeds 'boost cancer risk'

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

All sunbed users should be given a compulsory warning that they are putting themselves at increased risk of skin cancer, leading doctors said yesterday.

The chance of developing some tumours more than doubles with frequent sunbed use, they stressed.

Young people who have 'binge sessions' in tanning salons are in particular danger. But even occasional use can result in cancer, prematurely aged skin, eye damage and suppression of the immune system.

There are currently no Government guidelines on the use of sunbeds.

But the British Medical Association has reviewed all the evidence and now, as well as compulsory health warnings, wants a Government campaign to highlight the hazards of tanning.

A study published last month showed that in the last five years 8,100 Britons have died from malignant melanoma - the most dangerous form of skin cancer.

Over the same period only 4,900 Australians died of it despite their much sunnier climate. This is thought to be because Australians as a nation have heeded warnings against sunbathing.

The number of melanoma cases in this country is increasing by 7 per cent a year.

BMA head of science and ethics Dr Vivienne Nathanson said yesterday: 'We really need a public health campaign to educate people about the dangers of sunbeds and also the myths about tanning.

A suntan is not a sign of good health; a tan, even when there is no burning, always means that the skin has been damaged. A suntan is not nature's own sunscreen - it does not protect you from ultra-violet radiation.

'It's ironic - people use sunbeds because they think they'll look better and yet they will probably end up looking old prematurely and possibly getting skin cancer.'

Sunbeds first came into fashion in the 1970s and have become a boom industry. Although the year-round tan is now generally mocked by the fashion industry and the health-conscious, pre-holiday tanning sessions remain particularly popular.

Surveys show that in the 16-24 age group, at least one person in four has used a sunbed. They are twice as popular with women as with men. One study found that 17 per cent of users booked more than 100 sessions a year.

But according to the BMA's board of science, the chances of getting skin cancer rise by up to 20 per cent for each decade of sunbed use before the age of 56. Other effects include premature ageing, leading to leathery, wrinkled and sagging skin; damage to the eyes unless protective goggles are worn; suppression of the immune system that would normally protect against skin tumours; and adverse reactions to certain drugs, resulting in rashes, loss of skin colour and photosensitivity.

Dr Nathanson said it is a myth to think that going on a sunbed helps prepare for sun exposure on holiday.

She warned: 'The mistaken belief that the tan is protective may lead to failure to use adequate sun protection and a further increase in ultraviolet radiation exposure.'

She said sunbeds should never be used for cosmetic purposes, and urged the Government to bring in new rules for the industry.

'While the Government does not recommend the use of sunbeds, there is currently no requirement for training or regulation associated with the use of non-therapeutic UV radiation,' she said.

'A health risk warning and information leaflet should be compulsory wherever sunbeds are sold or hired.'

Sara Hiom of Cancer Research UK stressed: 'There is no such thing as a safe tan.'

The Sunbed Association, which represents operators, manufacturers and suppliers in the UK, issued a statement saying: 'Sunbeds offer a controlled environment when tanning, where sessions can be monitored and recorded to avoid UV over-exposure.

'This is certainly not the case when tanning outdoors.'

The association said it recognised the dangers of over- exposure and ensured that its members were trained and operated according to a strict code of practice.

It also recognised the need for a campaign to inform, educate and advise consumers.

As a result, it said, the first National Sunbed Awareness Day will take place on April 30.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

