TITLE	Hair dye alert reveals risk to cancer

by VICTORIA FLETCHER, Evening Standard

Fears over the safety of some of Britain's most popular hair dyes are raised today.

Scientists have discovered that in many cases, cosmetics giants have failed to carry out all the necessary experiments to ensure their products are safe.

A review of 10 hair dyes on sale across Europe has discovered that seven have insufficient data to confirm their safety.

In some cases, cosmetic companies failed to properly examine whether their dyes could cause cancer or cause cells to mutate.

One large scientific study in California has suggested a link with bladder cancer. And in Denmark, hair dye users are suing manufacturers, claiming their products caused allergic reactions.

The latest research has been carried out by a team of scientists working for the European Commission. They have been asked to review the research which led to 47 dyes being put on sale. The review of the first 10 hair dyes has just been released and reveals lapses in safety checks.

Insiders at the EC believe tough regulation of the hair dye industry may not be far away. It is thought a list of good and bad hair dyes will be drawn up, banning those which the industry cannot prove are safe.

Dr Ian White, the chairman of the Scientific Committee on Cosmetics and Non-Food Products, which is conducting the review, said the investigation was a major step in identifying which hair dyes can remain on sale and which may eventually be dropped from use.

He said: "There are more than 100 dyes used by the industry. Over recent years, at least 47 have come under scrutiny in one member state or another and we have been asked to review their safety. There is insufficient data to confirm the safety of a number of these dyes.

"It will now be up to the European Commission to decide what should be done and how long cosmetic companies should be given to provide new research which would prove they are safe.

"Some very complex chemicals are mixed up in hair dyes and so it's a whole new ball game as far as understanding their safety. But it is an issue which has to be sorted out."

Further research has suggested consumers who suffer from cancer after using permanent hair dyes may have an enzyme deficiency which makes them more vulnerable.

Proctor  and  Gamble, which owns Wella and Clairol, said it would not comment on the issue or what information consumers should be given on hair dye.

The Cosmetic, Toiletries and Perfumery Association, which represents the industry, said hair dyes are still safe to use as there is no new evidence that they may pose a threat to health.

Dr Christopher Flowers, a spokesman for the group, said: "Hair colourant products on the market are safe for use. They are controlled by the European Cosmetics Directive, which requires each hair colourant product to undergo a safety assessment prior to marketing.

"These assessments are open to inspection by the competent authority."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

