TITLE	'I'll always be a sunbedholic!'

by ALICE SMELLIE, Daily Mail

Earlier this month, the British Medical Association made a stark announcement: every sunbed user should be issued with a compulsory warning that they are exposing themselves to an increased risk of skin cancer.

A report by their board of science and education recommends that no one should seek a purely cosmetic sunbed tan, as it may result in acute and chronic health effects on the skin and eyes.

At least one in four people in the 16-24 age group has used a sunbed, and 17 per cent of users book a potentially lethal 100 sessions a year.

At the moment there are no government guidelines on sunbed use - but the number of melanoma cases in Britain is increasing by seven per cent a year.

Apart from cancer, problems that result from sessions in tanning shops include photoageing, where the skin is prematurely lined and wrinkled and there are pigment changes.

Eyes are especially sensitive and prone to damage from tanning equipment. Out in the sunshine, they are protected by the eyebrows and eyelashes, but these provide very limited protection on a sunbed.

"A suntan is never a sign of good health,' says Dr Vivienne Nathanson, the BMA's head of science and ethics.

"It is essentially skin damage, and we urgently need a public health campaign to educate people about the dangers of using sunbeds. The rising cases of skin cancer in Britain are extremely disturbing, and although ultraviolet radiation has its place in the treatment of certain skin conditions, we would never recommend using a sunbed simply to achieve darker skin."

Yet despite the warnings, there are thousands of young people for whom the look of a golden tan outweighs the dangers. Three young women who are aware of the perils, but are so addicted to sunbeds that they're willing to take the risk rather than give up their fix, explain why they'll keep on tanning.

Tanya Crolla: 'I worry about wrinkles'

Tanya Crolla, 21, works as a service co-ordinator. She lives in Surrey in a three bedroom semi-detached house. Tanya says:

Generally I'll have two sunbed sessions a week - I don't want to look too brown. In just ten minutes, my skin is a lovely golden brown. As well as looking permanently healthy, the time spent tanning is very relaxing. With a tan I feel more confident and attractive - especially if I want to wear little tops or dresses. There is nothing less appealing than a sundress with pasty flesh. Sometimes I am unable to go for a couple of weeks, which makes me panic. I hate it when my tan fades.

I first went on a sunbed at the age of 16. I had quite bad spots and was desperate for them to clear up. Within weeks of using a sunbed my skin had improved - so that encouraged me to continue going.

These days I am more aware of the ageing factor and I worry about wrinkles - so I cover up my face while I'm tanning and use a fake tan on it instead.

I don't have moles, so I don't worry about skin cancer. All my friends have sunbed sessions and none of us has ever burned or had problems.

I'll certainly carry on having them, although if my dream of moving to live in a hot country comes true I'll hopefully have a tan all year round.

Anna Palmer, 36, is a beautician specialising in semi-permanent make-up. She is single and lives in Chelsea, London. Anna says: I've seen all the bad press that sunbeds have had but no one is going to stop me using them.

My skin is as it should be for my age. I'd like to look ten years younger but who wouldn't? However, I don't have deep wrinkles or signs of sun damage.

I first discovered sunbeds when I was 19, mainly using them once a fortnight or so to keep a tan going after a holiday. For two years I've been using sunbeds far more regularly. Now, I go on them once or twice a week.

I like to look tanned and healthy but I find fake tans far too messy to bother with. For make-up, I use natural mineral colours. Having a tanned face complements this to give an all-over groomed appearance. So, sunbeds are part of my beauty routine, along with my hair, nails and clothes.

I do take precautions - I use a special tan accelerator cream with a UV screen for protection. I also go on holiday several times a year and always use lotion with an SPF of 25 or 30.

Of course, I know and accept that UV exposure of any kind can lead to skin cancer and premature ageing, but I make sure I always use protection. I have never burned.

We all do things that are not particularly good for us. I know that looking healthy and groomed gives me confidence and makes me more postive.

Tanja Wieck: 'I have a responsible attitude.'

Tanja Wieck, 30, is a beauty therapist, working in her mother's salon, Sharmi And Joseph, in Windsor. She lives in Warfield, Berkshire, in a three-bedroom detached house with her partner, Matthew, 32, who works in advertising. Tanja says:

I have been using a sunbed for half my life. I have naturally olive skin from my Sri Lankan mother, so I suppose I didn't need to go darker, but when I was 16 my mother reluctantly let me try out a sunbed. It really impressed me. My skin tone went darker but, best of all, my skin seemed to glow from the inside.

I have tried out all types of sunbed. In the summer I don't bother so much, but as winter approaches and my suntan fades I ensure I go once every two weeks. Quite simply, I feel more attractive afterwards.

These days, I think technology has improved so much that you don't need to worry anything like as much as before. I think they make most people look so much better.

I always wear protective cream, as well as goggles. I constantly check the moles on my body. I think that I will be fine because I have such a responsible approach. I haven't yet burned, and don't intend to. I have lovely skin, and I will keep looking after it - but I'll also keep on having sunbed sessions.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

