TITLE	Phone mast cancer fears

by DAVID WILKES, Daily Mail

A cluster of breast cancer cases near a mobile phone mast has raised new safety fears.

Five women in a hamlet, who all live within 1,500 yards of the 22ft mast, have been struck down since it was put up nine years ago.

One case of cervical cancer has also been reported while two men were diagnosed with tumours - of the bladder and spine. A further 27 people have suffered skin irritations and sleeplessness.

This means three-quarters of the community claim to be affected.

The worried residents of Wishaw, near Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands, are now fighting a proposal for a second mast in their community of 18 homes.

Heading the fight is mother of two Eileen O'Connor, 39, who lives just 300 yards from the existing mast, used by T-Mobile.

Diagnosed with breast cancer in November 2001, she needed an operation to remove the tumour, six months of chemotherapy, four weeks of radiotherapy and reconstructive surgery.

Mrs O'Connor said: "I have no history of cancer in my family so it came as a real shock.

"When I heard from the council about the proposal for the second mast I wrote to all the neighbours saying we should object. After that I began to hear from more and more people who had cancer."

Among them is Judie Villanueva, 60, a retired teacher who lives close by with her husband Derek.

She said: "I was diagnosed with breast cancer two years ago and had to have a mastectomy.

"I feel quite strongly that the mast is to blame. To have so many cases in such a small area you think there must be a connection. We feel we are being treated like human guinea pigs." As well as trying to stop the mast being built, the Wishaw Action Group plans to sue T-Mobile.

Dr Gerard Hyland, a physicist at nearby Warwick University, is backing their campaign.

"It is unethical to subject people involuntarily to this sort of electromagnetic pollution," he said.

"The mast could be very dangerous to certain people, but the problem is people don't know who will be most sensitive." An independent report in May 2000 gave mobile phone installations the all-clear.

The Independent Expert Group on Mobile Phones found no "general risk to the health of people living near to base stations on the basis that exposures are expected to be small fractions of guidelines".

It recommended a "precautionary approach", however.

T-Mobile said: "In July last year an independent survey by Alasdair Philips of Powerwatch (an antimast lobby group) showed the levels of signal were well below international safety guidelines recognised by the World Health Organisation.

"We also looked at alternative sites in the area but they proved to be unsuitable.

"T-Mobile is satisfied the site is safe and does not present a health risk to any member of the public."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

