TITLE	Weight loss cuts cancer risk

by ANGELA EPSTEIN, Daily Mail

Thousands of women would be spared breast cancer if they lost half a stone in middle age, a study has revealed.

Doctors have identified a crucial window during which weight gain has a significant impact on whether a woman contracts the disease.

Researchers studied the weight patterns of 41,000 women over a 20-year period.

The results showed that the breast cancer rate in women aged 30 to 50 was 40 per cent higher in those who had put on at least half a stone or were five per cent above their recommended weight.

The lowest breast cancer rates were found in those whose weight before the menopause was steady or had been reduced by at least five per cent.

The researchers also considered the impact of weight gain and loss between the ages of 18 and 30 but found very little variation in breast cancer rates during this period.

Fifty was taken as the cut-off point because most women have had the menopause by this age and at least 80 per cent of breast cancers are post-menopausal.

The study was carried out by Britain's only breast cancer research dietician, Dr Michelle Harvie, at the Nightingale Centre, a Health Service breast screening unit in Manchester.

Last night Tony Howell, Britain's sole professor of preventative oncology, said the findings demonstrated that women could exert control over whether they contracted the disease, which affects one in ten British women.

"This study gives a clear public health message that weight gain in middle life is associated with breast cancer risk so preventing that gain diminishes the risk significantly," said Professor Howell, who is based at Manchester's Christie Hospital.

Dr Harvie said: "This is the first time that we can specifically say at what point in a woman's life her weight gain will affect her risk of getting breast cancer.

"The upshot is that avoiding weight gain between the ages of 30 and the menopause is the best way to limit that risk."

Scientists are unsure why weight gain at this time of life influences the risk of contracting cancer.

According to Manchester-based breast cancer specialist Lester Barr, one possibility is the effect of oestrogen and insulin-producing growth factors in the body.

"The fat which women acquire at this time of life tends to settle round their waist and is more mobile," said Mr Barr.

"This in turn can disturb hormone levels which promote changes to breast tissue." Another link between weight gain and breast cancer is that breast cells are more susceptible to disruption of hormone levels in older women.

Dr Harvie is exploring both theories through a year-long study of 100 women aged 35 to 45 who have a family history of breast cancer and who are at least one-and-a-half stone overweight.

The women are on diets and weight loss programmes to see if this will reduce hormone levels.

The research is being funded by the Genesis Appeal charity, which is currently raising &pound;10 million to build Europe's first breast cancer prevention centre at Manchester's Wythenshawe Hospital.

Dr Harvie said: "Women shouldn't be frightened by the results because the good news for those who have already gained weight is that they can reduce their risk of breast cancer by losing at least five per cent of their weight and maintaining that weight before and after the menopause."

Most breast cancers are postmenopausal as it can take 30 years for the cancer to develop from initial mutation to the presentation of a lump or other visible sign.

That explains why even if an early mutation occurs in a woman while she is in her twenties she may not know she has cancer until she is in her fifties.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

