TITLE	Who's at risk of breast cancer?

by ANGELA EPSTEIN, Daily Mail

What are the chances that one day you will get breast cancer?

One in ten women will get the disease at some stage in their lives, but the odds are even greater for those with high-risk family histories or lifestyles.

To demonstrate how the danger varies from one person to the next, we asked Professor Tony Howell - the UK's only professor of preventative oncology - to assess four women on how likely they are to develop the disease.

Although his findings are worrying, they also bring hope by showing that much can be done by women themselves to reduce the risk.

Click on the links at the bottom of the page to read his findings.

You can check your own breasts by following out animated guide in the blue box above.

Britain has one of the highest rates of breast cancer in the world, claiming 13,000 lives a year.

Last week, after it was shown that the death rate of younger women could be halved by early detection, a landmark study strengthened calls for screening to be brought in from the age of 40, rather than the present age of 50.

Clara Mackay, head of policy and research at Breast Cancer Care, said the research - in which 200,000 women were studied - was "very significant".

Meanwhile, a massive fundraising campaign - supported by the Daily Mail and led by the breast cancer charity The Genesis Appeal - is underway to build Europe's first breast cancer prevention centre in Manchester.

This centre of excellence will be a home to international research, clinical trials and training as scientists try to discover why, each year, 35,000 women contract the disease. The centre will be headed by Professor Howell.

Here, he makes his expert assessment of the percentage risk facing our four volunteers, and gives advice on how to improve their chances.

Follow the links below to read his assessment of four volunteers.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

