TITLE	Viagra boost after cancer

by JAMES CHAPMAN, Daily Mail

Viagra can help 'save' the sex lives of men who have surgery for prostate cancer, doctors have found.

A study revealed that patients who had their prostate removed were seven times more likely to regain normal erectile function if they took the drug, widely used to treat impotence.

Doctors say the findings are 'so dramatic' that all men undergoing a prostatectomy should be given Viagra.

Prostate cancer is now the most common form of the disease among males, with around 20,000 cases a year in Britain.

Four out of five patients who have their prostate removed suffer erectile dysfunction because crucial nerves are severed.

Although the latest surgery does not involve cutting nerves leading to and from the penis, they can still be damaged, causing problems.

But the latest study suggests that along with treating erectile dysfunction in prostate cancer patients, Viagra can also prevent the condition in the first place.

'The results are so dramatic that every man undergoing prostatectomy should consider this if he is interested in preserving erections,' said Dr Harin Padma-Nathan, of the Los Angeles-based University of Southern California. Researchers asked 51 men to take either 50 milligrams or 100 milligrams of Viagra every night for nine months starting four weeks after surgery for prostate cancer.

Another 25 men were given a placebo, or dummy drug, during the same time period without knowing what they were talking.

All of the men had normal erectile function before surgery. After nine months of Viagra treatment, study participants then spent eight weeks without medication.

Researchers found that 27 per cent of men who were given Viagra - regardless of the dose - had regained erectile functioning equal to what they reported before having surgery.

Just 4 per cent of men given the placebo reported regaining their previous potency.

Dr Padma-Nathan, unveiling the findings at the annual scientific meeting of the American Urological Association in Chicago, said they suggested Viagra 'prevents the degeneration of erection function following surgery'.

Men could take the drug continuously for nine months, and then stop, but continue to enjoy normal sex lives.

Previous research in animals suggested that Viagra could help repair nerves that had been damaged during surgery, added Dr Padma-Nathan

Fast food could be responsible for the increase in prostate cancer in the West, the conference was told.

Researchers said they uncovered evidence suggesting a link between high-fat foods and the disease.

They examined a group of Japanese men and compared them to Japanese males living in the U.S.

When Japanese men move to the West and begin eating burgers and pizza and less Oriental foods such as soy, their risk of prostate cancer increases.

'Within a generation the incidence of the disease begins to soar,' said urologist Dr Leonard Marks.

j.chapman@dailymail.co.uk

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

