TITLE	The suntan junkies

Most people are concerned that the sun's rays can cause skin cancer, but less than 40% bother to apply high factor suncreams, according to a new survey.

The research was conducted by the Office of National Statistics for Cancer Research as part of the charity's SunSmart campaign.

More than 65,000 cases of skin cancer are diagnosed in the UK each year and the research was released yesterday, on the eve of Sun Awareness Week which begins today.

The research among 1,850 people found 75% were concerned that exposure to the sun can result in skin cancer.

But less than 30% tried to stay in the shade and under 40% bothered to apply high factor sunscreen.

Overall women were more sun aware than men and middle-aged people were better informed about the sun's dangers than the under-25 and over-65 age groups.

But just 6% of those surveyed avoided the midday sun and fewer than 5% covered up with hats, t-shirts and sunglasses.

Only 0.3% said they would have their suspect moles checked by a doctor.

The survey also revealed that 70% of people still think suntans make them look healthier or more attractive.

Among 16-24 year olds, 73% believed that exposure to the sun might cause skin cancer but only a quarter used high factor sunscreen as protection.

Dr Charlotte Proby, a consultant dermatologist at Cancer Research UK, said: "The results of this survey are concerning.

"Although it is encouraging that many people are aware of the risk of skin cancer, too many of them are still not protecting themselves against the sun's damaging rays.

"It is particularly worrying that so many of the young people questioned in the survey are being slow to change their bad habits, because it is skin damage early in life that is most likely to result in skin cancer later on."

SunSmart is co-ordinated by Cancer Research UK with funding from the UK Health Departments.

Its message, based on the word Smart, is that people should:

Stay in the shade from 11am-3pm.

Make sure you never burn.

Always cover up with a T-shirt, wide brimmed hat and sunglasses.

Remember to take extra care with children.

Use factor 15 plus sunscreen.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

