TITLE	Cancer is biggest male killer

by JAMES CHAPMAN, Daily Mail

Cancer now kills more British men than any other illness, experts revealed yesterday.

It has overtaken heart disease for the first time, according to figures from Cancer Research UK.

Alarmingly, while overall cancer deaths are slowly declining, those linked to obesity and drinking are rising.

Last night doctors warned that too many men are still ignoring the danger signals that could save their lives.

'It is vital that men are made aware of the early warning signs for cancer and realise the chances of being cured are far better if the disease is treated as soon as it becomes apparent,' said Professor Sir Paul Nurse, CRUK's chief executive.

'Us men are renowned for our head- in- the- sand mentality when it comes to our health and if we are going to reduce deaths from cancer then we need to change that.'

The latest figures show that in 2001 about 79,800 men died from cancer in the UK, 300 more than died from heart disease, excludingstrokes. Over the last ten years the numbers of men dying each year from heart disease has dropped by 30 per cent, partly because some have adopted more healthy lifestyles, the report said.

Experts also believe people are more aware of the danger signs of heart disease. Death rates from cancer fell 15 per cent over the same period.

The 'big five' killers are cancers of the lung, prostate, bowel, stomach and oesophagus. Though smoking is still the largest single cause, one in ten cases is now thought to be triggered by overweight or obesity.

The type causing most concern is oesophageal cancer, which is killing 6,000 people a year, up by 8 per cent over the last ten years.

The risks of oesophageal, bowel and kidney tumours are known to be increased in obese men, while obese women have a greater risk of breast cancer.

A fifth of British men are now reckoned to fall into this weight group. Professor Nick Day, CRUK's leading epidemiologist, based at Cambridge University, said: 'The story is one which has been predictable for quite a number of years.

'Mortality from heart disease has been coming down steadily. That's being driven partly by better treatment of acute heart attacks, partly by the big fall in adult males who are smoking, and partly by a change to more healthy diets and greater intake of fruit and vegetables.

'In contrast, cancer mortality has been much more resistant.' Dr John Toy, CRUK's medical director, said men are beginning to heed the warnings.

'But many still won't speak up and go to see their doctor. They put their fingers in their ears and they won't listen to the messages they are being given.

'Actually, there's nothing worse than being anxious that there is something wrong with you when there is nothing wrong with you at all. A doctor could allay those fears.

'And having cancer is not necessarily a death sentence. It means you have got an illness that requires treatment. If you have that diagnosis early, then the cures can be effective.'

Though Britain has gone some way to improve its reputation as the 'poor man of Europe' when it comes to cancer death rates, we are still lagging behind many countries, the experts added.

CRUK points to a number of key symptoms that can be the first signs of cancer in men, and should be investigated by a doctor.

WHAT TO LOOK OUT FOR

A sore that won't heal up

Stomach or bowel problems that don't go away eg persistent indigestion or change in bowel habits

Blood in the urine even if this is only once

Difficulty passing urine

A lump in one testicle

A mole that is changing or getting bigger or looks different from other moles

A new lump anywhere on the body

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

