TITLE	Cancer risk '45% higher' on Pill

by BEEZY MARSH, Daily Mail

Contraceptive pills taken by more than three million women in Britain may be significantly raising their risk of breast cancer, it was claimed last night.

A 45 per cent increase in the disease was found among women who had been taking the secondgeneration Pill for three years or more.

A ten per cent increase was found in those taking it for less than three years.

The findings follow a study of 100,000 women.

The second-generation Pill, introduced in the 1970s, contains lower doses of oestrogen, which has been blamed for heightening cancer risks, than the first version, introduced in the 1960s.

An estimated 3.25million of the 3.74million British women on the Pill now take the second-generation version.

In the latest study, researchers at the University of Tromso in Norway studied 100,000 women aged 30 to 70.

A total of 851 were found to have breast cancer and were subject to more detailed scrutiny with regard to their contraception history.

The conclusions were published in the International Journal of Cancer.

Author Vanessa Dumeaux said: 'Our study seems to indicate a positive association between total dose of oestrogen and the risk of breast cancer.'

She warned that the link could be due to chance or confounding factors and called for urgent further studies.

'Experimental data strongly suggests that oestrogens have a role in the development and growth of breast cancer.

'They promote the development of mammary cancer in rodents and exert both direct and indirect proliferative effects on cultured breast cancer cells from humans.' UK specialists urged caution in interpreting the results.

Dr Kate Law, director of clinical trials for Cancer Research UK, said: 'Although it indicates there might be a trend, there really aren't enough people in the study who developed the cancer to produce meaningful figures.'

Dr Richard Sullivan, head of clinical programmes at the charity, added: 'It is very difficult for women to weigh up the pros and cons of the Pill, but basically, the overall cancer risks are still very low.

'If you have a familial history of breast cancer, if you are a smoker or drink heavily, then the situation may be different as the risks appear cumulative.'

A spokesman for the Family Planning Association added: 'This research adds to the jigsaw of information that there is around breast cancer and the Pill.

'There are all sorts of factors that contribute to breast cancer, including diet, age, lifestyle and smoking. The Pill is one risk in many and its role has not yet been fully established.'

Other studies have produced a variety of warnings against the Pill.

Last year, young women with a family history of breast cancer linked to a faulty gene were warned that talking it for five years or more increased their risk of the disease by a third.

A review by the World Health Organisation found that women who take it for five years or longer may double their chances of developing cervical cancer.

Elsewhere, researchers have associated the Pill with a higher risk of stroke, particularly if women smoke or have high blood pressure.

But the contraceptive is also known to protect against fatal cancers of the womb lining and the ovaries.

b.marsh@dailymail.co.uk

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

