TITLE	Is your bra bad for you?

by AMY ANDERSON, Daily Mail

We investigate why wearing a bra that doesn't fit could damage your health.

THREE years ago, a U.S. study carried out by scientists Sidney Ross Singer and Soma Grismaijer surveyed 4,700 women and concluded that the odds of getting breast cancer increased dramatically the longer women wore bras. The survey showed that those who had breast cancer were also the ones who reported wearing bras for more than 12 hours a day.

The study concluded that the constricting effect of bras suppressed the lymphatic system below the armpits, blocking an internal network of vessels supposed to flush toxic wastes from the body.

Over time, these toxins accumulate in the breast tissues and create an environment in which cells can turn cancerous.

However, many breast specialists and breast cancer organisations have disputed this study.

Two years ago, a study was carried out by Japanese researchers which found that increased skin pressure caused by a tight-fitting bra could suppress the nocturnal elevation of the hormone melatonin, which some doctors have claimed could also increase the risk

of breast cancer.

But there is evidence that bras can cause other health problems, too. A study by the University Hospital of Wales asked 100 pre-menopausal women to go without a bra for three months, then return to wearing one for another three months.

On average the number of pain-free days went up by 7 per cent when the women stopped wearing bras.

The study concluded that breast pain and health complications relating to the breasts were increased by wearing a bra.

Although the study did not find a specific link between wearing a bra and an increased risk of breast cancer, it did report lower incidences of breast cancer in cultures who spent more time bra-less.

CAN YOUR BRA CAUSE BREATHING PROBLEMS? THE British School of Osteopathy found that ill-fitting fashion bras put stress on bones and muscles, which can cause breathing problems. The study reported that badly fitting, tight and underwired bras supported the breast by pressing on the rib cage which restricts breathing and puts pressure on the diaphragm.

Breathing is undertaken using a number of muscles, one group of which are the accessory muscles. These run from the upper part of the cervical spine and attach to the upper ribs. When wearing tight fashion bras, the middle ribs are held tight, which means the upper ribs have to work harder.

Sports bras can cause breathing difficulties if worn all the time. They are designed to hold the breasts in place during exercise, but should not be over used because they are much more constrictive than ordinary bras.

CAN YOUR BRA CAUSE IRRITABLE BOWEL SYNDROME? FASHION bras can constrict the rib

cage by several inches more than conventional bras. The pressure can be so great that it could even affect digestion.

The British School of Osteopathy has noted Irritable Bowel Syndrome and constipation as a result of illfitting bras constricting the digestive process by putting pressure on the diaphragm.

CAN YOUR BRA CAUSE SKIN PROBLEMS? SEVERAL studies have found that bras which are too tight can cause lesions or lumps on the skin - also called lympomas. They are caused by hooks on the back of bras digging into the skin. Choose a bra with a thick back strap with at least two sets of hooks and padding on the inside of the hooks.

CAN YOUR BRA CAUSE CIRCULATION PROBLEMS? LARGE breasts require support or the muscles supporting them will have to work too hard. The most problematic areas are the pectoral muscles in the chest. If the problem is severe enough, the neurovascular bundle of nerves to the arm can become compressed and the woman may feel pins and needles.

The constant wearing of a sports or tight-fitting bra can also cause circulatory problems if the elastic around the rib cage is too tight.

These bras rely on support by compression rather than a good fit. Constantly having breasts being pushed inwards can cause circulation restriction, which may damage breast tissue.

CAN YOUR BRA CAUSE BACK PAIN?

THE trapezius muscle connects the neck to the shoulder. It is recognised that a badly fitting bra providing insufficient support causes this muscle to tighten, to take up the weight of the breasts. This can lead to shoulder, neck and back pain because this muscle is being constantly strained.

WHAT TO LOOK FOR IN A BRA

EXTRA-soft, cushioned and wide load-bearing shoulder straps to ease pressure, and which don't dig in.

Moulded non- stretch cups which provide maximum breast control without underwiring. If your breasts bulge either over the top of the bra or out of the sides, it is too small for you.

Buy a bra where you can adjust the strong shoulder straps to fit your shape. Two or three bra fastenings or hooks provide greater support. The back band of the bra should be across your mid-back for support.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

