TITLE	Cancer danger from obesity

by BEEZY MARSH, Daily Mail

A worring increase in obesity among British men and women is creating a cancer timebomb, warn experts.

Overweight and obese people with couch-potato lifestyles can expect to live up to seven years less than thinner people.

And the risk of dying from some cancers is up to five times higher among heavyweights, it has emerged.

Diagnosis of the disease may be delayed because of body size.

Experts from Cancer Research UK say about one in eight of all cancer deaths among non-smokers in Britain may be due to weight problems, which have reached epidemic proportions in the general population.

Latest figures show obesity rates here are fast catching up with those in America. The UK already tops a European obesity league table, with around 20 per cent of men obese and a further 50 per cent overweight.

Among women, 24 per cent are obese and 33 per cent classed as overweight.

Professor Julian Peto, of the Institute of Cancer Research, said: "We are getting fatter and it is causing cancer.

"British men are now where American men were six years ago. There's such a huge prevalence of obesity and it's causing ill-effects in people's health."

Experts are not yet certain exactly why obesity can cause cancer, but some forms of the disease - such as breast cancer and cancer of the prostate - may be due to hormonal changes.

Meanwhile, obesity has shot up by 62 per cent in British men within the last nine years and is still rising.

Professor Peto, who is due to give evidence today to a Commons Health Select Committee inquiry into obesity, added: "Alcohol, sunlight, air pollution and occupation are relatively trivial causes of cancer deaths.

"Being overweight is the most avoidable cause of cancer in non-smokers."

Scientific studies suggest that obesity increases the risk of death from cancer by 35 per cent in men and 45 per cent in women.

The figure is higher, however, for specific forms of the disease. Doctors use a measurement called body mass index - BMI - to determine obesity.

This is calculated by dividing a person's weight in kilograms by the square of their height in metres.

A BMI of anything between 20 and 25 in adults is fine, but over 25 is classed as overweight. More than 30 is obese.

Obese men, with a BMI of 30 to 35, are at nearly double the risk of terminal cancer of the liver and gullet, are 50 per cent more likely to die from bowel cancer, and 20 per cent more likely to die from prostate cancer.

Among very obese men, with a BMI of 35 and over, the risk of liver cancer proving fatal rises more than threefold, while there is an 80 per cent extra risk of death from bowel cancer, and a 30 per cent increased risk of death from prostate cancer.

Obese women are 60 per cent more likely to die from breast cancer and more than twice as likely to die from cancer of the womb or gullet.

Lymphatic cancer is twice as likely to kill women with a BMI of 35 and over.

Similarly, cancer of the cervix is more than three times as likely to prove fatal for the same group of women, and in the case of cancer of the womb, the figure is almost three times.

Among the fattest women, with BMIs over 40, the risk of fatal womb cancer soars fivefold, while the chances of terminal breast cancer double.

Professor Jane Wardle, of Cancer Research UK's behavioural unit, said men are less likely than women to recognise they are overweight and also less likely to tackle the problem.

She added: "The issue of weight has predominantly been about appearance until now, and because society is more concerned with the appearance of women, men have been free of this sense that their appearance makes them unacceptable."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

