TITLE	Breast cancer 'test' available

by AMY ANDERSON, Daily Mail

A new test that can distinguish between 'good' and 'bad' oestrogen, and measure them, could be a helpful tool for early detection of women who have a higher risk of breast cancer.

It is widely recognised that the female hormone oestrogen is responsible for 'feeding' breast cancer tumours.

However, what is not commonly understood is that there are two types - one good, and one bad, much like cholesterol.

The Estronex 2/16 Ratio Test measures the ratio between these two oestrogens, called 2-OHE1 (good oestrogen) and 16a-OHE1 (bad oestrogen).

It is the 16a-OHE1 that causes tumours to spread and grow - high levels have been found in women with breast cancer - but the 2-OHE1 can inhibit growth.

The test works by measuring the ratio of good oestrogen to bad in a urine sample. The result is a single figure on a sliding scale of one to eight.

A result of two or less indicates a high-risk bracket. Ratios between two and four are deemed healthy, and between five and eight are low risk. The test is carried out in your home and sent to a laboratory for analysis. The results can be back within seven days.

If your ratio of good oestrogen is low, you can elevate the levels through dietary changes. Cruciferous vegetables such as broccoli, cauliflower and cabbage help to raise levels of 2-OHE1.

A study in the Journal Of The American Medical Association found that eating one or two servings of cruciferous vegetables a day can lower the breast cancer risk by up to 40 per cent.

Flaxseed can also help increase levels of 2-OHE1. Recent U.S. research found that daily supplementation with flaxseed significantly increases the levels of good oestrogen, suggesting a protective effect in pre-menopausal women.

Several other studies have found that the long-chain omega-3 oils from oily fish (salmon, tuna, mackerel and herring) are protective against breast cancer because they help to raise levels of 2-OHE1.

Dr Nigel Abraham, director of sciences at the Individual Wellbeing Diagnostic Laboratories, where the new test is analysed, says: 'It's not a definite diagnosis of breast cancer, but it's a useful indicator of early warning signs. It is a simple, painless and effective way to monitor your oestrogen ratio levels.'

If women do find they have low levels of 2-OHE1, there is no need for panic.

'The levels of good and bad oestrogen can fluctuate, particularly if dietery requirements are not adhered to,' says Dr Abraham. 'The best way to balance the ratio is through diet.'

The test could be used by all women as a safeguard against any increased risk of breast cancer, but might be especially helpful to those with a prolonged use of oral contraceptives, who take hormone replacement therapy, or who have a family history of breast cancer - all of which put women at a higher risk of breast cancer.

Kellie Rilley, 26, a nutritionist from London, decided to take the test because of a family history which she felt put her at a higher risk of oestrogen-related cancers (breast and cervical).

'I knew about the two types of oestrogen from my dietary studies,' she says.

'I took the test in January this year and sent off my urine sample to the laboratory. The test results came back within a week and were quite shocking. My ratio was 1.6, which meant I had quite a significant imbalance. Yet I'd thought I was eating healthily.

'I immediately started taking a supplement called DIM, which is a compound extracted from broccoli. I also began taking flaxseed and eating a lot more cruciferous vegetables - at least one portion a day.

'I did another test three months later, and my ratio had gone up to 3.2, which put me into the "healthy" range. I am continuing the diet and hope to get my ratio up to four or five.'

The Estronex 2/16 Ratio Test costs &pound;100. Call the Individual Wellbeing Clinic Laboratory on 020 7730 7010.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

