TITLE	Smoking triggers breast cancer

Women who smoke increase their exposure to a toxic metal which scientists have now found is directly linked to a higher risk of breast cancer.

Exposure to cadmium is also linked to the risk of a woman's unborn child developing breast cancer, according to the new study.

Cadmium is a naturally occurring metal found in soil, rocks and water and is also used in batteries.

People could be exposed through food grown in contaminated soil or fish from tainted water. However the greatest exposure comes from smoking, which doubles the daily intake of cadmium.

Exposure to cadmium has already been linked to lung cancer, lung disease, kidney damage and possibly prostate cancer.

Now, for the first time scientists have found evidence that exposure to the metal may be a direct risk factor for a woman and her unborn baby developing breast cancer.

The study, published today in the online journal Nature Medicine, was carried out by researchers from the Lombardi Cancer Centre at Georgetown University, USA.

Using female rats which had had their ovaries removed, they looked at how cadmium mimics oestrogen effects on the body.

They found rats exposed to low levels of cadmium showed an increase in mammary gland density and uterine weight, plus changes in the womb lining. All are tell tale developments in the early onset of breast cancer.

When pregnant rats were exposed to the same low dose, their female offspring began puberty early and developed mammary glands sooner.

Early onset of puberty has been shown to increase a woman's chance of getting breast cancer. Researcher Mary Beth Martin, an associate professor in oncology, said: "We never expected to see this strong a relationship given how different cadmium and oestrogen compounds are.

"What we saw suggests a direct link between low dose cadmium exposure and an increased risk for breast cancer.

"The more we can learn about how this works in rats and eventually people, the better lifestyle choices women can make."

 For the study the rats were exposed to levels of cadmium comparable to the weekly intake level considered acceptable by the World Health Organisation.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

