TITLE	Fatty diet link to breast cancer

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Women who eat high-fat foods could be doubling their risk of breast cancer, scientists say.

It is the first time that researchers have discovered a link between the disease and eating too much fat.

Experts claim the latest findings show that making simple dietary changes, such as drinking skimmed milk, could curb the rising tide of breast cancer.

The number of Britons diagnosed with the disease has hit a record 40,000 a year and cancer specialists predict that the figure will continue to rise because modern lifestyles put women at greater risk.

But the study by British scientists reveals diet may play a bigger part in promoting the disease than previously thought and could lead to a significant shift in healthy eating advice given to women.

The findings show women who had eaten more than 90g of fat a day had twice the risk of breast cancer of those who had eaten less than 40g a day. Those eating 40g a day had the lowest level of risk.

Scientists funded by the Medical Research Council and Cancer Research UK analysed information from detailed food diaries completed by women who later developed breast cancer and compared them with the results from women who did not develop the disease.

More than 13,000 women in Norfolk aged between 45 and 77 took part in the European Prospective Investigation of Cancer and Nutrition study, published in The Lancet medical journal.

Altogether, 168 women developed breast cancer between the start of the study in 1993 and 2000.

Dr Sheila Bingham, who led the research, said: "Our study shows there is an emerging link between eating too much fatty food and increasing the risk of breast cancer.

"The effect seems to be related particularly to saturated fat found mostly in high fat milk, butter, meat and some cereals such as biscuits and cakes."

She said imprecise methods of research in previous studies may have hidden a link.

In the current study, researchers asked women not only about their consumption of 120 common foods, but also asked them to complete detailed diaries of what they ate, how it was cooked and portion size.

Dr Bingham said analysis of the list of 120 foods - the method used in most other studies - showed fat consumption had no effect on breast cancer risk.

"It was only when we looked at the detailed diaries that a strong link became apparent," she said.

A study by U.S. researchers published this week also found that young women who eat lots of red meat and full-fat dairy products such as cheese are raising their breast cancer risk.

Women eating the most fat had a 33 per cent extra risk of developing the disease compared with those eating the least. Those most at risk obtained, on average, 23 per cent of calories from animal fats, compared with 12 per cent in the lowest-risk group.

The U.S. Nurses' Health study involved more than 90,000 women aged 26 to 46, who answered regular questionnaires about diet, lifestyle and health. During the eight years of the study, 714 women developed breast cancer.

Researcher Dr Eunyoung Cho said: "Overall, we observed there was a higher risk of breast cancer among women who ate foods rich in animal fat such as red meat, cheese, ice cream and butter during their 20s, 30s and 40s."

Women in the UK are advised by the Department of Health that total fat in the diet should not exceed 35 per cent.

This means a woman on a 2,000 calorie a day diet should eat no more than 75g of fat - even though this raises breast cancer risk by 60 per cent, according to the UK study.

Figures from the UK National Diet and Nutrition Survey show that almost one in ten women eats more than 90g of fat a day. Average intake is around 60g, while only 16 per cent of women eat 40g or less.

A Cancer Research UK spokesman said: "This research highlights the importance of eating sensibly."

j.hope@dailymail.co.uk

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

