TITLE	Can the sun cure cancer?

by ANASTASIA STEPHENS, Daily Mail

We all know that exposure to the sun can cause skin cancer. But sunlight could also save us from other types of cancer.

There is new evidence that vitamin D - the 'sun vitamin' - can kill tumours and stop them from growing in the first place. The studies show that vitamin D - which the body produces as a response to sunshine - can fight breast, colon and prostate cancers.

It is proving so powerful that pharmaceutical companies are developing synthetic versions as cancer treatments.

According to Dr Damian Downing, editor of the Journal of Nutrition and Environmental Medicine, we need 4,000iu of vitamin D for optimal cancer prevention - that's ten times the recommended daily intake (RDI) of 400iu.

So what's the evidence that sunlight can save us from cancer?

In 2001, Nasa researchers concluded that more than 23,000 deaths in northern America could be due to lack of sunlight. Americans who live in the sunniest areas have higher mortality from skin cancer but significantly lower mortality from breast and ovarian cancer, prostate cancer and colon cancer.

The National Cancer Institute in America found that cancer cells have abnormally high numbers of vitamin D 'receptors'. When vitamin D was added to the cells, it attached to the receptors and stopped cells from multiplying.

A study of 181 men with prostate cancer showed they had lower levels of active vitamin D than healthy men of the same age.

In another trial, human prostate cancer cells were implanted in mice with weak immune systems. Vitamin D was then given, and was shown to slow the growth and spread of cancer.

Other U.S. studies have found a strong correlation between breast cancer mortality and lack of exposure to ultraviolet sunlight.

As for the link between UV light and skin cancer, Dr Downing believes the picture is more complex than most people think.

"It is likely that chemicals in sun creams and pollutants such as organophosphates, PCBs and dioxins are also to blame for cancerous changes in skin," he says.

"Burning skin does cause damage, but UV in moderation can do you good."

How sunlight can help health 

Most of our vitamin D is made from cholesterol beneath the skin in a reaction that involves sunlight. Low levels of exposure to sun means low levels of vitamin D. This vitamin is vital for our body:

Vitamin D is involved in normal cell growth and maturation and so may play a critical role in cancer prevention.

Vitamin D regulates the absorption and use of calcium and phosphorus. These minerals are vital for growth and the development and hardening of bones and teeth.

Immune system: Parts of the bone marrow where immune cells are made respond to vitamin D, which is also thought to play a role in the prevention and treatment of infectious diseases. 

By playing a role in the secretion of insulin by the pancreas, vitamin D helps in the regulation of blood sugar. 

Vitamin D ensures the functioning of healthy nerves and muscles by regulating calcium levels in the blood, vital for nerve impulse transmission and muscle contraction.

Safely getting enough sunshine 

According to Dr Downing, half of us are deficient in vitamin D in the winter. And up to 30 per cent may be deficient all year round due to long hours spent in the office.

As the vitamin can be stored in the liver to give us a constant supply, this is all the more reason to build up reserves in summer.

Fair-skinned, blond and auburnhaired people absorb most UV but also burn the soonest - they need an hour of sun, exposing most of their skin, to generate 4,000iu.

Mediterranean skin would need three to four hours, while Afro-Caribbean skin would need seven hours to generate the same.

The production of vitamin D in the body is blocked by anything which blocks ultra violet light including skin pigment, smog, fog, sunscreen, windows and hats.

How can you ensure you're exposing your skin safely?

Expose as much skin as possible for up to an hour, but avoid peak burning times and cover up as you begin to tan.

Suncreams contain potential carcinogens, block out UV needed to make vitamin D and may encourage you to expose skin for longer than you otherwise would.

Use suncream only on high-risk burn areas such as the nose or shoulders. Cover up well before you think you'll burn. Use sunscreens on the face, which is prone to sun damage and wrinkling.

A week before going to sunny holiday destinations, take a betacarotene supplement and other antioxidants that fortify the skin's sun defences - they can reduce sunburn risk by up to 40 per cent.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

