TITLE	Vitamin pill cuts cancer rates by a third

A cocktail of vitamins and minerals has dramatically cut cancer risk and death in a large group of men, it was revealed today.

The dietary supplement contained the same levels of antioxidant nutrients obtained from a diet rich in fruit and vegetables.

Scientists in France found that over a seven-year period, the capsule reduced cancer rates by almost a third and mortality by 37 per cent.

The findings provide some of the clearest evidence yet of the importance of healthy eating. A similar improvement in diet could prevent 12,000 cancers a year among French men and save many lives, the researchers said.

They pointed out that a supplement was only used in the study for practical reasons and warned against taking "miracle pills" in place of healthy food.

A total of 13,000 men and women aged 35 to 60 took part in the Su.Vi.Max study. Half were given a daily supplement containing dietary doses of vitamins and minerals.

The supplement contained 6mg of beta-carotene, 120mg of vitamin C, 90mg of vitamin E, 100 micrograms of selenium, and 20 milligrams of zinc. A dummy capsule was given to the other participants.

Over a seven-and-a-half year follow-up period, 103 men and 71 women died. Cancer, which affected 562 volunteers, was the major cause of death while heart disease afflicted 271.

In total, 56 men and 47 women died from various kinds of cancer while heart disease claimed the lives of 28 men and five women.

Taking the supplement had no effect on heart disease, and did not influence cancer rates in women.

But the scientists said a 31 per cent reduction in the risk of all cancers was seen in men taking the antioxidants, while male death rates were lowered by 37 per cent.

They presented the findings to experts at a recent meeting of the Societe Francaise d'Atherosclerose et de l'Arcol in Paris.

The researchers, led by Dr Sarge Hercrerg, from the Scientific and Technical Institute for Nutrition and Foods in Paris, wrote in their paper: "The positive results from our double-blind, randomised trial described for the first time in a population from an industrialised country will need to be confirmed by other trials.

"Even now, however, they completely support recommendations for following a healthy diet, particularly one rich in fruit and vegetables which are major dietary sources of antioxidant vitamins and minerals, for all ages in life and for both sexes."

They thought the benefits did not apply to women because their diets were better than those of the men, and most already consumed adequate levels of antioxidants.

The gender difference may not be so apparent if the research was repeated in Britain, where "junk-food" culture is more widespread.

An Oxford University study a year ago which looked at vitamins C, E and beta-carotene concluded that they were a waste of money. This was followed by a Food Standards Agency report warning that overdosing on vitamins and minerals could be harmful.

The French scientists agreed that vitamins and minerals were better obtained from fruit and vegetables.

 They wrote: "There is reason to believe that the effect would be less than that of dietary sources of antioxidants, particularly fruit and vegetables, which provide other protective substances,"

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

