TITLE	HRT doubles risk of cancer

by BEEZY MARSH, Daily Mail

Women today face a stark warning over links between HRT and breast cancer.

A massive British study of a million women found the risk of cancer can be twice as high for those taking the most common form of HRT for ten years.

Government experts are now issuing an alert to GPs and hospitals over the treatment, which is being blamed for 20,000 cancer cases in the past ten years. HRT, taken by

1.7million women in Britain to relieve symptoms of the menopause, was already at the centre of growing concern over cancer, heart disease and strokes.

The new study, published in the Lancet today, provides conclusive evidence that all forms of HRT increase the chances of cancer. The extra risk begins to fall away once the treatment is stopped, disappearing after five years.

The biggest threat is posed by the form which combines the hormones oestrogen and progestogen - taken by more than half of those on HRT in Britain.

The Committee on Safety of Medicines, which advises the Government, has now ruled that the NHS must tell women of the danger. But, crucially, it stopped short of telling them to come off HRT, leaving patients and GPs to decide.

The committee said in a statement: 'For short-term use of HRT, the benefits outweigh the risks for many women. For longer-term use, women should be aware of the increased risk of breast cancer and other adverse effects.'

Breast cancer charities criticised the Government for failing to spell out what is meant by safe shortterm use of HRT.

Delyth Morgan, chief executive of Breakthrough Breast Cancer, said many women would be unable to take 'a truly informed decision'.

She said: 'This is a very disappointing day for all women. There has been a strong suspicion for many years that HRT is implicated in breast cancer. The results confirm our worst fears.'

Breast cancer cases have been rising for the past 20 years, and now top 40,000 a year - outstripping even lung cancer.

HRT pills, patches, implants and sprays are used to ease women from distressing symptoms of the menopause, which include hot flushes, mood swings and loss of libido.

Six million HRT prescriptions were dispensed last year, at a cost to the NHS of &pound;133million.

The Million Women Study, by Cancer Research UK, the NHS Breast Screening programme and the Medical Research Council, monitored more than a million women from 50 to 64 between 1996 and 2001. Half of them were using HRT or had done so.

It is the most comprehensive review ever of the therapy.

Cancer Research UK scientists found that preparations which mix oestrogen and progestogen - include the leading Premique brand - double the chances of breast cancer if taken over ten years.

An oestrogen-only form, taken mainly by women who have had a hysterectomy, increases the risk by 25 per cent over ten years and researchers believe there is a similar increase with a form called tibolone.

Professor Valerie Beral, who led the study by Cancer Research UK's Epidemiology Unit in Oxford, said: 'Risks are significantly increased after one to two years and increase with duration of use.

'In past users, the risk of breast cancer returns to that of women who have never used HRT within a few years of ceasing use.'

The combined form of HRT was introduced because oestrogenonly treatment can increase the risk of uterine cancer. Professor Beral said: ' Women need to weigh the increased risk of breast cancer against the lowered risk of uterine cancer.

'They may well want to discuss the options with their doctor.'

The study also found that breast cancer victims on HRT are 22 per cent more likely to die from the disease - possibly because HRT causes tissue changes which make it more difficult to pick up early stopping HRT suddenly, as this can increase the severity of symptoms such as hot flushes and night sweats.

There was also concern that women might be left to find out for themselves about natural alternatives to HRT - such as vitamin and herbal supplements - as many GPs do not support them.

A spokesman for Wyeth, the drug firm which makes Premique, said: 'We are concerned that the representation of these findings may cause unnecessary alarm and distress.

'These findings do not necessitate any urgent changes to a woman's treatment.

'HRT remains a very important treatment for alleviating the distressing symptoms of the menopause, which are typically short-term in duration.'

Dutch doctors writing in the Lancet called on women aged 45 to 70 who are taking HRT longterm to stop 'as soon as possible'.

But UK experts declined to go that far. They said women should 'balance the risks and advantages'.

b.marsh@dailymail.co.uk

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

