TITLE	Produce or pesticides?

by DARREN BEHAR, Daily Mail

A cocktail of potentially harmful pesticides has been detected in a host of everyday supermarket produce, it has been revealed.

Illegal levels of chemicals linked to cancer, disruption of the nervous system and hormone problems were found in tests on fruit, vegetables, fish and other products.

Some of the chemicals are banned in the UK.

The findings come in a snapshot survey by the Consumers' Association, which analysed data from tests undertaken in 2001 and 2002 by the Government's Pesticides Residue Committee.

The watchdog grouped the produce into three categories according to how likely they were to contain chemicals - listing them as 'persistent offenders', 'ones to watch' and those with 'few residues'.

Apples, nectarines, grapes, pears, peaches and strawberries were among the worst fruits for residues.

Other persistent offenders listed were celery, lettuce, bran, salmon and flour.

Some pears contained traces of chlormequat - a pesticide that has been linked to stomach upsets. The chemical, which is not approved in the UK, is used to ensure that pears are a regular shape.

Some other chemicals detected had so-called 'genderbending' qualities that are said to disrupt male and female hormone levels and are linked to certain types of cancer.

On the Consumers' Association's 'ones to watch' list were apricots, bananas, spinach, cereal, noodles, lamb, tea, chocolate and bread.

The 'few residues' list included chicken, baked beans, cabbages, yoghurt and eggs.

The watchdog said there was no clear-cut evidence of a link between the chemicals and health problems, but warned that little is known about the long-term effects.

The Pesticides Residue Committee tested foods for the presence of chemicals and whether the levels exceeded the statutory Maximum Residue Level.

Supermarkets say the MRL is a legal limit rather than a 'safety level', but critics say pesticides can cause illness below this level.

Helen Parker, editor of the Consumers' Association magazine Which?, said: 'Little is known about the cumulative effect of consuming pesticide residues.

'However, if you are concerned there's no need to cut fruit and vegetables from your diet. Buying organic, washing and peeling all fruit and vegetables and cooking them will help to minimise any potential risks.'

The Food Standards Agency says the health risk of eating less fruit and vegetables outweighs the risks of possible exposure to pesticides.

But it plans to lobby the EU to improve the pesticide approvals process to take account of the possibility of a cocktail effect.

Some environmental campaigners want supermarkets to carry out more rigorous tests to ensure foods which contain unsafe levels of pesticides do not reach the shelves.

Sandra Bell, of Friends of the Earth, said: 'Supermarkets like Tesco, Asda and Sainsbury have shown little evidence that they are doing enough to deal with the problem.

'Consumers should be free to buy food without the risk of it being contaminated with chemicals.'

The supermarkets claim they are doing a great deal to ensure low levels of pesticide residues.

A spokesman for Tesco said: 'Customer safety is the priority. Over the past ten years we have worked hard to reduce the levels of pesticides on crops.'

Sainsbury's said: 'We are aware that this is an issue and are trying to tackle the problem.'

d.behar@dailymail.co.uk

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

