TITLE	'HRT made my cancer worse'

by CATHERINE WALKER, Daily Mail

Fashion designer Catherine Walker is not interested in vindication. Even though she started Hormone Replacement Therapy (HRT) eight years ago and, the following year, aged 51, was diagnosed with breast cancer, she takes absolutely no satisfaction from knowing that her suspicions about HRT were well-founded.

A study of one million women carried out by Cancer Research UK and published last month provided the first conclusive evidence that taking HRT over the course of ten years significantly boosts - and with some formulations doubles - a woman's breast cancer risk.

Whether or not Catherine Walker's breast cancer was linked to her use of HRT will never be known for certain. But the combination oestrogen and progestin pill she took - used by half the 1.7 million British women on HRT - was singled out in the study for posing the highest risk.

Like many women diagnosed with this devastating disease, Catherine has delved into her past in an effort to find out what caused it. A contributing factor, she feels, was the death of her first husband, John, in an accident 28 years ago, leaving her a widow, aged 30, with two baby girls to support.

The stress of this trauma, believes Catherine, delivered a body blow to her immune system, making her less able to fend off proliferating cancer cells later in life.

Without HRT, though, she feels the cancer might not have taken hold. "I suspect HRT aggravated the situation," she says.

The designer, who was one of Princess Diana's favourites, was prescribed HRT eight years ago to combat menopausal symptoms. At the time, she asked her gynaecologist to check a small lump she had felt in her left breast.

A mammogram provided the all-clear. Her "tiny, tiny, nothing lump" was confirmed as just that - clearing the way for her to start on HRT.

Even so, she did not relish the prospect - mostly, she says, "because my body reacts so strongly to anything I take". Even antibiotics make her ill.

"But at that point, I knew I had to do something about my menopausal symptoms. I was on the edge and absolutely exhausted all the time. It was really quite frightening. I could hardly walk I was so shattered, and I felt really, really sick.

"My gynaecologist put me on the lightest form of HRT at the time, Premarin. I got the oestrogen through a patch, and took a progestin pill for the second half of my cycle.

When I started on HRT, I had this huge burst of energy. You might think after suffering from those feelings of utter exhaustion, this would be welcome - but I hated it.

"It wasn't happy energy. It was the wild energy you see cats get sometimes when they tear around the house. For the two weeks on oestrogen, I couldn't sleep at all - and when I started on the progestin I felt very sick.

"At the suggestion of my doctor, I tried switching the time I took the progestin to see if it eased the sickness. But nothing made any difference.

"I don't want to set myself up as a barometer for how other women fare on HRT, but for me it was appalling."

Catherine decided to read up on everything and anything related to the menopause. She learned that the progestin used in HRT is a synthetic form of the female hormone progesterone. She discovered that a natural progesterone tablet was available in France, so bought some.

Replacing the progestin with progesterone tablets gave only a marginal improvement. She persisted for four months, then returned to her hormone specialist for help.

"She told me that I didn't have to keep on the oestrogen patch: I could just take the progesterone, which she said my body would transform to oestrogen."

Catherine continued with the progesterone tablets only until the following April, when pain in her left breast led her to check it once more.

"I immediately realised that the lump I'd had before starting out on HRT had grown. Now, it felt like a hard bubble."

This time, Catherine was diagnosed with breast cancer.

"It may sound odd, but the diagnosis was a relief because I knew there was something very wrong with me from the start of my menopause," she says.

The good news was that the lump was small and her lymph nodes were not affected. A lumpectomy was followed by six weeks of radiotherapy.

She remembers her oncologist saying to her at the time: "It's a good thing you have children." Which she took to mean that children - even those in their 20s, as hers were at the time - provide the most compelling reason for women to put up a fight.

Catherine made a list of things she felt she needed to do to survive breast cancer. "I wanted to be involved in getting myself better," she says.

"I started keeping a diary, charting what I was eating and how it made me feel. For instance, I worked out that I felt much better eating only carbohydrate, and no protein, in the evening."

Not long after that, she learned about progesterone cream - a product available only on prescription. Today, she attributes the cream not only with restoring the balance of her body's haywire hormones, and boosting the progesterone she feels she has always been short of, but of literally turning her life around.

"I started using a little of the cream each day - my oncologist was open-minded about it - and, overnight, my life changed. I feel I wouldn't be here functioning normally today had it not been for the progesterone cream.

"I use the cream every day of the month. You are supposed to stop for a certain number of days of the month, but I don't because it makes me feel out of balance. It is okay to use it continually, but I will stop if I start to feel stronger."

Along with her second husband, Saud - they have a home in Chelsea and a weekend retreat in East Sussex - she has devised a regimen which she feels keeps her in the best possible shape.

Each day, she walks or swims. She does yoga, meditates, and eats wholefoods. A breakfast of quinoa (a grain) and some green tea is followed by lunch of steamed chicken or fish with steamed vegetables. Supper might be four or five steamed vegetables with some amaranth (another grain).

She avoids wheat and fruit but eats plenty of yoghurt. She is a staunch supporter of The Haven Trust - a centre in London offering counselling to anyone affected by breast cancer.

It also offers a huge selection of complementary therapy treatments aimed at alleviating the side-effects of chemotherapy and radiotherapy, provided free of charge to breast cancer patients.

When asked about the future, all Catherine Walker will say is that she wants to continue to do her best - and to enjoy each day as it comes.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

