TITLE	More foods to prevent breast cancer

by NAOMI COLEMAN, femail.co.uk

There is growing evidence that eating the right foods play an important part in helping to prevent breast cancer.

Some foods, such as oily fish, can prevent the growth of cancerous tumours, while others, such as green leafy vegetables, contain compounds that can help to fight cancer-causing hormones.

Here, we look at four more key foods that can help protect you against breast cancer 

Orange or yellow coloured fruit and vegetables are a rich source of betacarotene - which is the precursor of vitamin A and a potent antioxidant which helps fight off highly-reactive molecules that can harm our body and lead to severe diseases such as breast cancer. 

Recommended dose: Five portions a day (80 grammes per portion) to help protect against breast cancer. Between seven and ten portions a day if breast cancer has already developed. 

Oily fish such as mackerel, sardines, trout and salmon have all been linked to a lower incidence of breast cancer. Evidence shows that eskimos who have a high intake of oily fish have no incidence of breast cancer. This is thanks to the presence of omega-3 fats. 

Recent findings have revealed that Omega-3 oils prevent or slow down the growth of cancerous tumours and also boost our immune system. This is because omega-3 oils compete with omega-6 fats (found in cooking oils which can encourage cell division) and keep cell growth under control. 

Omega-3s appear to have the ability to switch off growth mechanism of cells and prevent them from dividing, and, in turn, leading to cancerous tumours. Recommended dose: Three portions of fresh oily fish each week.

Fibre contained in pulses and wholemeal foods help excrete oestrogens out of our bodies. Too many oestrogens from our own hormones and hormone-like substances found in plastics and chemicals can trigger cell division in our breast tissue. Evidence shows that too much cell division can lead to breast cancer. 

Fibre can help keep breast cancer at bay because it helps eliminate excess oestrogens from our body and prevents reabsorption of oestrogens in our intenstines. 

Linseeds are a particularly good source of fibre. This is because they contain a high content of lignans which have been found to be protective against breast cancer by regulating oestrogens and reducing tumour growth in later stages. 

Fibre also maintains regular bowel movement. This is because the fibre's texture helps move food through the digestive system more quickly than some other foods. It is thought higher stool weights in women indicates lower levels of circulating oestrogens - which helps protect against cell changes in our body, and in turn, from breast cancer. 

A high fibre diet also helps maintain a healthy gut. This is because soluble fibres create 'friendly bacteria' needed to fight off bad bacteria - meaning that your body is less exposed to harmful toxins that could cause cancer. Recommended dose: A cupful - or around 7oz - of pulses a day.

Broccoli, brussel sprouts, cauliflower and kale - all members of the cabbage family are said to be highly toxic towards cancerous cells. This is because they contain cancer-fighting compounds known as indole-3-carbinol which is thought to deactivate oestrogen, and in turn, help reduce the risk of breast cancer. 

The sulphurophanes found in broccoli, which are responsible for its bitter taste, have been shown to improve the performance of enzymes in the liver which help detoxify our body. Levels of this vital enzyme are found to be low in women with breast cancer. Radishes, swede and turnips are also believed to be effective cancer fighting vegetables. 

Recommended dose: Five portions a day (80 grammes per portion) to help protect against breast cancer. Between seven and ten portions a day if breast cancer has already developed.

Nutritionist and breast cancer survivor Suzannah Olivier has written The breast cancer prevention and recovery diet (&pound;3.99) published by Penguin, or visit www.health and nutrition.co.uk. If you're looking for recipes packed with food to help fight breast cancer, The Plant Programme by Professor Jane Plant (&pound;16.99) published by Virgin, has all you need to know.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

