TITLE	How sleep can fight cancer

A good night's sleep may be a potent weapon against cancer, claims a leading scientist.

Professor David Spiegel, from Stanford University

Sleep: could help the fight against cancer

Medical Centre in California, says he has found evidence that sleep can help cancer recovery.

He pointed out that how people sleep can seriously alter the balance of hormones in their bodies, which in turn may influence cancer progression.

One study found that women at high risk of breast cancer had a shifted cortisol cycle.

Cortisol is a hormone which normally reaches peak levels at dawn and then declines during the day.

It is one of many hormones that help regulate the immune system, including the activity of cells that help the body fight cancer.

Therefore, cortisol rhythm thrown off by troubled sleep could make a person more cancer-prone, said Prof Spiegel.

In past work he and colleagues had found that women with breast cancer whose cortisol levels peaked in the afternoon rather than at dawn died earlier from the disease.

Another hormone called melatonin, pumped out by the brain during sleep, was an anti-oxidant capable of preventing damage to DNA that can lead to cancer.

In women melatonin also slowed production of oestrogen, which can spur cancerous breast and ovarian cancers to keep dividing.

Female shift workers who are up all night and produce less melatonin may therefore be more vulnerable to oestrogen.

Recent research showed that female night shift workers had higher rates of breast cancer than women who slept normal hours.

Mice whose sleep rhythms were disrupted also showed far more rapid tumour growth than normal mice.

Prof Spiegel and colleague Dr Sandra Sephton reported their findings in the journal Brain, Behaviour and Immunity.

He said: "Doctors should not just be fighting the tumour but helping the people with the disease to live with it.

"Although having cancer might be something to lose sleep over, we'd rather help people regain the sleep and lose the cancer."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

