TITLE	Pollution peril 'worse at home'

by ROBIN YAPP, Daily Mail

Indoor pollution can endanger health more than that encountered outdoors, say scientists.

High cancer and allergy rates are linked to constant exposure to harmful gases and chemicals from household goods and office equipment, researchers warned.

Their conclusions come three months after a government-backed inquiry called for a ban on thousands of untested chemicals in household products.

The EU report said that cigarette smoke and items such as computers, carpets, paints and plastics all release toxic chemicals.

The incidence of asthma, now suffered by one in five Britons, has been linked to the damaging effects of indoor air.

Researchers suggest many cases of cancer can also be blamed on

and 2.5 times more likely to develop asthma.

The risk was even higher for children who lived with fewer than two pets - thought to protect youngsters against developing allergies.

Children on antibiotics whose mothers suffered from allergies had double the risk of developing them, and those breast-fed for more than four months were three times more at risk.

The risk was a massive 11-fold for children who received broad-spectrum antibiotics, were breast-fed for four months and did not have any pets, Dr Johnson told the European Respiratory Society's annual conference in Vienna yesterday.

She said 'The results of our prospective birth study suggest that antibiotic use is a risk factor for allergy in children, particularly those who already have other risk factors.

'What's more, the increased risk is proportionate to the number of courses of antibiotics given.

'Three courses in the first six months mean that the risk is multiplied by five for a child who did not have much contact with animals and was breast-fed for a long time.'

Antibiotics had an extra damaging effect in children who had inherited a predisposition to allergies or had not benefited from protective factors.

Dr Johnson, a senior epidemiologist, said the most likely reason was changes in bacteria in the gut.

A spokesman for the National Asthma Campaign said: 'Studies looking at the relationship between the development of asthma and allergies in children who have received antibiotics at an early age, as well as the effects of when women have taken antiobiotics while pregnant, have been inconclusive.

'Whilst this is an interesting study, further research is needed to understand the complexities of the relationship between these factors.'

j.hope@dailymail.co.uk

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

