TITLE	GPs told 'cut back HRT'

by JENNY HOPE and KATE FOSTER, Daily Mail

Doctors have been warned to cut back prescriptions of HRT amid mounting concern about its link to breast cancer.

All women taking the drug to alleviate menopause symptoms are to be given guidance about its risks.

The guidelines will be published by a group of leading experts.

Hormone replacement therapy, which is taken by 1.7million women in Britain, can reduce the hot flushes and night sweats of the menopause and prevent brittle bones.

But studies have shown the most commonly-prescribed drug can double a woman's chances of developing breast cancer if she takes it for ten years.

It is also at the centre of growing worries over dementia, asthma, heart disease and stroke.

There is particular concern that many women have taken the treatment as a rejuvenating lifestyle drug for many years, unaware of its potential dangers.

Professor David Purdie, an adviser to the Department of Health, said: 'HRT is not for all women. But neither should it be withdrawn.

'It is the right treatment for some women, and it is the duty of doctors to identify those women and offer it to them.'

Professor Purdie is head of the Royal College of Physicians' Consensus-Committee on HRT, which is publishing the UK's first guidelines for doctors on the drug.

It is drawing up the guidance during a two- day meeting in Edinburgh.

He added: 'I think HRT is of immense value for women who suffer from the symptoms of the menopause. We know it works for them and prevents osteoporosis and fractures.

'But there is probably an association between long-term HRT and breast cancer.

'I think there is an increased risk of breast cancer but I think it is a small one. It should be a careful decision.

'The general view is that prescribing HRT should be an individual thing. If a woman has the symptoms of menopause, if they are interfering with her happiness, she should be offered the treatment.

'But she can have the final say and she can reject the treatment.

'If she has brittle bones, she can be offered treatment. There is a huge problem with osteoporosis and there is now good evidence that HRT can prevent the dreaded hip fracture. But that has to be balanced against the risk of cancer.

'It seems very unlikely that a hormone-released as part of a woman's natural cycle will kill them but the question is how we mimic the natural cycle best to protect the heart, the brain and the bones.'

Up to 40 per cent of women take HRT at some time to replace the natural hormones lost during the menopause.

But concerns have grown over the safety of the treatment, particularly when taken over many years.

Most women are advised to take HRT for around three years but some take it for up to ten because they claim an improvement to their lifestyles, with better libido, fewer mood swings and a general feeling of well-being.

One U.S. study was abandoned last year after initial results suggested that long-term use could increase the risk of breast cancer, heart disease and stroke.

A further study of one million British women suggested that preparations which mix oestrogen and progesterone double the chances of breast cancer over ten years.

It also found an oestrogen-only form, taken mainly by women who have had a hysterectomy, increases the risk by 25 per cent over ten years.

Once the treatment is stopped, the risk begins to fall away and it disappears after five years.

The Consensus Committee on HRT will issue the guidance to UK health departments as well as to patients.

The panel, consisting of consultants, nurses and pharmacists, does not have the power to instruct doctors to obey but Professor Purdie says GPs are ' desperate' for official guidance on what HRT can and cannot do.

Last night, the move was welcomed by cancer charities.

Dr John Toy, medical director of Cancer Research UK, said: 'There is a suspicion that some women have taken HRT as a lifestyle drug.

'If they think HRT is simply a tablet that rejuvenates you and nothing more, they would not be properly informed.

Like all medicines, it should be taken only if there's a medical reason.'

j.hope@dailymail.co.uk

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

