TITLE	'Stop HRT after five years'

by KATE FOSTER, Daily Mail

Women should be given HRT for no longer than five years to avoid an increased risk of breast cancer, heart disease and stroke, say experts.

Doctors will be warned to limit the time patients are on the Hormone Replacement Therapy amid growing fears it is linked to the diseases.

The guidance issued yesterday by the group of leading HRT experts will be given to GPs across Britain treating the 1.7million women taking the drugs to alleviate the miserable symptoms of the menopause.

The advice stopped short of telling doctors not to prescribe HRT to patients but advised them to consider each case on an individual basis.

The experts from the Royal College of Physicians (RCP) said any woman choosing to take HRT for more than five years should be 'counselled on the long-term risks'.

They said that for every 1,000 women on HRT for five years, there were two to six extra cases of breast cancer than among those who did not take the drug.

'The use of HRT remains controversial, said Professor David Purdie, lead adviser to the Department of Health on HRT and chairman of the RCP's committee on the treatment.

'Evidence shows it has an important role in the relief of menopausal symptoms.

'Women need advice on the balance of risks and benefits as well as support to help them make a choice that is right for them.'

The guidance was issued after a two-day meeting in Edinburgh and follows the publication of the Million Women Study.

This found that using the combined oestrogen and progesterone treatment - the most common form of HRT - doubled the risk of developing breast cancer if taken for ten years.

The RCP committee said that women were likely to be alarmed by reports that studies had made links between the treatment and breast cancer.

It added: 'The reality is that the absolute breast cancer risk is small.'

However, the experts went on with this warning: 'The benefit of symptom relief has to be offset against the small increase in absolute risk of breast cancer and cardiovascular disease and stroke.

'In view of this, individualised advice is needed.

'Absolute risks and benefits need to be explained to each woman considering HRT.

'Alternative therapies, including lifestyle changes, should be discussed.'

The treatment also helps prevent fractures caused by osteoporosis but these benefits were outweighed by the overall risks of the drug, said the committee.

Up to 80 per cent of women experience menopausal symptoms, such as hot flushes and night sweats. Nearly half find these distressing.

The committee said that HRT allowed many patients to continue leading their normal lives.

But concern is growing that many women take it as a lifestyle drug to improve mood swings and libido for many years without realising the potential health risks.

The committee does not have the power to ensure that doctors follow their advice but it is likely to be welcomed by many who have asked for guidance.

Delyth Morgan, chief executive of Breakthrough Breast Cancer, said the experts had provided muchneeded clarity for GPs and patients.

'However, more research is needed to overcome the problems associated with HRT use and mammographic screening,' she said.

k.foster@dailymail.co.uk

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

