TITLE	How to live without HRT

by ANGELA BEST, Daily Mail

Doctors have been warned that women going through the menopause should be given Hormone Replacement Therapy for no longer than five years, because of the increased risk of breast cancer, heart disease and strokes.

So what other ways are there to cope with the debilitating symptoms that affect millions of women every year?

At 51, I am going through the menopause myself, and as a health and fitness consultant I have been researching natural alternatives to HRT for three years.

Starting today, in a major series no woman should miss, together with health nutritionist Maryon Stewart, I will show you how with changes to your diet, natural supplements and a little exercise, you can transform your life - without the worries of HRT.

A few months ago I turned 51, and I'm the first to admit that I hate getting older. First there's the peri-menopause, then her witchy twin the menopause, and there's no way round either of them if you are a woman of a certain age.

With all respect to the medical profession, doctors have not been able to do a lot to help the situation, and as we were reminded again last week, the jury is still out on the benefits of HRT.

Doctors have been warned not to give menopausal women oestrogen or combined oestrogen and progesterone treatment for more than five years because of the increased risk of breast cancer, heart disease and strokes.

The annoying thing is, it doesn't have to be like this. There is lots we can do to take charge of ourselves and get the most out of life, whatever the menopause might throw at us.

If you stop and look at the things we've each handled in our lives - career, marriage, husbands, etc - a natural process like the menopause becomes a lot less threatening.

In our 30s and early 40s, what mattered most was what we looked like. But as we approach 50 and beyond, we see people around us getting sick, and that's definitely not the path we want to take.

Instead of focusing on having a smaller waist or tighter bottom, we now need to see things from a re-focused, healthy point of

view. I call us fiftysomething girls Pioneering Pausers. Pioneering because in our mothers' and grandmothers' day, the menopause was equated with getting old, when the truth is that this is a time when we have truly become women of power, wisdom, inner strength and emotional balance.

I have also started a campaign to delete the word menopause and replace it with Phase 2.

In the past few years there has been an explosion of information pertaining to Phase 2, mostly written by pharmaceutical companies who want to put all of us on the same little pill.

But, the dangers of HRT aside, it doesn't make sense to prescribe a blanket treatment.

How sensible is it, for instance, for an overweight woman with higher levels of oestrogen stored in her fat cells to take oestrogen treatment?

You're probably sitting there thinking this all makes sense, but at the same time asking yourself: 'But what do I do right now?' You want a good night's sleep tonight, you need your hot flushes gone by next week, and you'd like a solution to your vaginal dryness before the holidays.

WELL, it's simple, and over the next three days we'll be telling you how changes to your diet and lifestyle can help you combat the menopause naturally.

Once you have established an eating routine which will help balance your hormones, we will advise you on the supplements you can take to replace HRT.

There are two types of HRT - oestrogen-only treatment or combined oestrogen and progesterone treatment.

You will know which type you are taking, and can then adapt our alternative programme to suit you. Don't panic if you are one of the 1.7 million Pioneering-Pausers who are currently taking HRT. There are two ways of replacing it with a natural alternative.

First, you can wean yourself off gradually, over the course of a couple of months, by reducing the number of pills you take so that the symptoms don't come flooding back.

As you do this, start introducing natural products to help rebalance your body.

The other alternative is to wean yourself off the HRT then give your body a couple of months to completely rid itself of the chemicals and see what symptoms pop up. If you are fully in Phase 2, you may not get many.

It would be a good idea to make a naturopath - a therapist who uses food and exercise to treat illnesses - and the local health food store your new best friends.

Extracted from Change For The Best by Angela Best (Warner Books, &pound;7.99). 

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

