TITLE	Baby food in cancer alert

by SEAN POULTER, Daily Mail

Baby food firms have been warned to change the seals on their jars amid fears of contamination by a cancer-causing toxin.

Food safety chiefs have demanded similar action on a range of products from ketchup to pasta sauce.

The moves, announced yesterday by the European Food Safety Authority, follow the discovery of the chemical semicarbazide in glass jars and bottles of fruit juices, jams, honey, pickles, vegetables, mayonnaise, mustard, sauces and ketchup.

EFSA and the food industry believe the contamination is linked to the spongey plastic used in airtight gaskets on the lids. Some studies of the effects of SEM on animals have linked it to cancers, liver damage and, at high doses, miscarriage and birth defects.

The EFSA said the risk to humans, including babies, was "very small". But Britain's Food Standards Agency said it would be ' understandable' if parents chose to switch away from buying food in jars.

Boots is sending thousands of leaflets to its stores, offering advice to parents who want alternatives. They include information on preparing homemade meals.

Leading manufacturers in the &pound;200million a year baby food market, including Heinz and Cow  and  Gate, say they are working on alternative seals.

The SEM discovery has thrown the food industry into turmoil and triggered an urgent investigation in Britain and Europe.

The Consumers' Association demanded urgent action to assess the health risks and find safer seals.

Spokesman Monique Warnock said: "The food industry needs to show its commitment to consumer safety by taking immediate action to find alternative sources of packaging, to ensure against any potential health risks".

The EFSA insisted there was no reason for anyone to change their eating habits and warned that the loss of important nutrients in baby foods could be far more harmful than any SEM contamination.

That was why it was not ordering their withdrawal. But its expert panel - chaired by British toxicologist Dr Sue Barlow - said: "The highest concentrations of SEM have been reported to be in baby foods packaged in glass jars and bottles.

"Due to their food consumption patterns and small body weight, the highest intakes of SEM are likely to be in infants of six to 12 months consuming such foods regularly.

"Given the present uncertainties in the science, the presence of SEM in baby foods is undesirable."

The panel added: "There is no risk of immediate illness to adults, children or infants from consumption of foods containing semicarbazide.

"The concern relates to health in the long term because of the possibility that semicarbazide may cause cancer. The risk, if any, is judged to be very small.

"EFSA does urge the pursuit of an action programme to reduce the presence of SEM in foods, including the identification of alternative packaging solutions and monitoring of levels of SEM." Sir John Krebs, chairman of the UK Food Standards Agency, said it was not advising against eating food in jars.

But he added: "Parents may understandably be concerned by the continuing uncertainty, which may lead some to choose alternative foods".

Sir John said: "There is considerable uncertainty about the possible risks from semicarbazide.

"Because of this we have made clear to the European Commission and the food industry that alternative methods for sealing jars of food should be developed as a precautionary measure."

The presence of SEM was first identified by manufacturers, who volunteered the details to the EFSA earlier this year.

Michael Maulin, of Heinz UK, said: "This is an industry-wide issue. Heinz, together with other manufacturers and cap suppliers has been working closely with the European and national authorities to reduce and eliminate SEM from the lids of glass jars.

"A joint industry group has made presentations to EFSA on two issues, firstly reducing semicarbazide and secondly eliminating it completely.

"Heinz is already testing other alternative solutions. We would expect to have a complete solution for this in four to six months that would remove it completely."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

