TITLE	More women abandoning HRT

by BEAZY MARSH, Daily Mail

Hundreds of thousands of women have abandoned hormone replacement therapy in the wake of health scares over breast cancer and heart disease, doctors have revealed.

Experts warn that the exodus from HRT could leave thousands at risk of the crippling bone disease osteoporosis.

Up to half of the estimated 1.7million British women on HRT have stopped taking it or are being slowly weaned off it because of mounting concerns over its safety over the past six months.

Women are acting after a British study found that the most commonly-prescribed form of the drug doubles the risk of developing breast cancer if taken for ten years.

HRT also increases the risk of stroke and is at the centre of growing worries over dementia, asthma and heart disease.

Experts from Manchester Royal Infirmary and Cambridge University estimate that up to 850,000 women have turned their backs on HRT.

The Women's Nutritional Advisory Service, which offers a helpline and alternatives to HRT, says it has been overwhelmed with calls from women desperate to stop taking the therapy.

The development ends the reign of HRT as a "lifestyle drug" which eased distressing symptoms of the menopause such as night sweats and boosted libido for many women.

But it has left a generation at risk from bone fractures and struggling to cope with the menopause.

Dr Peter Selby, a consultant hormone specialist at Manchester Royal Infirmary, said: "My gut feeling is that somewhere between a third and 50 per cent of women who were on HRT are coming off it or have come off it already.

"Some are desperate to come off it straight away. In the old days we could sit down with women of a certain age and say 'You don't have to have HRT, but it certainly won't do you any harm'. But there are so many good effects and it will help your heart".

"Those days are gone, but the danger is that we will now see an increase in osteoporotic fractures as a generation of women may not be getting the protection of their bones that they once were."

After the menopause, women face an increased risk of bone thinning because of a fall in the level of the hormone oestrogen.

One in three women over 50 suffers osteoporosis and many of those on HRT, which contains synthetic oestrogen, are taking it to help ward off the disease.

Around 14,000 people a year die in Britain as a result of an osteoporotic bone fracture and many others suffer pain and disability.

There are fears this number may now increase. Dr Selby said that many women are not aware that there are non-hormonal medicines which can help protect their bones, as well as other measures such as taking Vitamin D and calcium supplements.

There are also concerns that women who were taking HRT to cure the ills of the menopause are turning to some alternative remedies which are not clinically tested and could pose a serious threat to health.

Doctors there reported the case of a 57-year-old woman who developed symptoms associated with hepatitis after three weeks on the product, which is a member of the buttercup family.

She recovered two weeks after she stopped taking the remedy. It is taken as an alternative to HRT to counter the menopause's hot flushes, and is already known to speed up the spread of breast cancer. The findings have renewed calls for the stricter regulation of supplements.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

