TITLE	Meat-rich diets 'up cancer risk'

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Women who eat large amounts of meat or fatty foods may be at greater risk of developing breast cancer, research has found.

It reveals that those whose diets are rich in meat and saturated fat are up to 20 per cent more likely to contract the disease.

The study is the most conclusive evidence so far that meat is linked to breast cancer, which affects 40,000 British women every year.

The findings will alarm followers of the controversial high-fat, low- carbohydrate Atkins diet, which already has doctors concerned about its long-term health effects.

The exhaustive research - which analysed 45 studies involving 25,000 patients and

580,000 healthy women from around the world - shows diet may play a bigger part in developing breast cancer than previously thought.

It found that those who ate large amounts of saturated fat - found in meat, cheese and other full-fat dairy products - were 20 per cent more likely to develop breast cancer.

Large amounts of meat produced a 17 per cent greater risk than eating little or none.

Diets high in monounsaturated fats such as olive oil increased the risk by 10 per cent. Higher overall fat consumption had an extra 13 per cent risk.

Researchers from the Ontario Cancer Institute in Canada accounted for obesity and high calorie consumption - which are known to increase the risk - and still found meat and saturated fat were independent factors.

The study, published today in the British Journal of Cancer, does not recommend ideal amounts of dietary fat and meat because it only compared extremes in diets.

The Department of Health advises women to eat no more than 35 per cent fat.

Figures show that, on average, British women eat 60g of fat a day. Almost 10 per cent have more than 90g and 16 per cent have 40g or less.

Dr Lesley Walker, director of science information at Cancer Research UK, said: 'It's been very difficult to separate out the effects of dietary fat and obesity and previous studies have been inconclusive.

"But by combining data from a wide range of studies using different methods and including a very large number of people, this research provides the strongest indication yet that dietary fat has an independent effect on the risk of breast cancer.

"Tying down the dietary contributors to cancer is important as it will allow us to give the best possible advice about how to avoid cancer.

"The effect of dietary fat looks quite small but the results add weight to the importance of a healthy, balanced diet low in saturated fat and containing plenty of fruit and vegetables."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

