TITLE	Working women's cancer risk

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Professional women are 50 per cent more likely to die of breast cancer than unskilled workers, official figures have revealed.

The statistics contrast starkly with those from 15 years ago, when unskilled or semi-skilled workers were 13 per cent more likely to die from the disease.

Experts say the latest figures from the Office of National Statistics show that women who have embraced modern lifestyles are more likely to be affected by well-known risk factors for the disease.

These include having no children or having one or two later in life and not breastfeeding.

Recent research also shows that alcohol raises the risk and could account for 2,000 cases a year.

More than 40,000 British women are diagnosed with breast cancer every year and some 13,000 die from the disease.

The latest figures - released yesterday - relate to 1997 to 1999. They show that professional and managerial women were 50 per cent more likely to die.

Yet in the period from 1986 to 1992, unskilled and semi- skilled women were 13 per cent more likely to die than those in professional and managerial jobs.

The divide was even more dramatic in 1993 to 1996, when unskilled and semi-skilled women were 26 per cent more likely to die.

Professor Valerie Beral, of Cancer Research UK's Cancer Epidemiology Unit at the Radcliffe Infirmary in Oxford, said the death rate had decreased because working-class women now have greater access to treatment.

She added: 'Traditionally, it has always been the case that professional women are at greater risk because of factors like having fewer children later in life.

'But they were also better placed to take advantage of newer treatments that improved survival in the 1980s and 1990s.

'As a result, the death rates for women in lower social classes were worse until they also began to benefit from the same treatments.'

Professor Beral said the introduction of a national screening programme for breast cancer would have made a small difference by pushing up early detection rates for women in lower social classes.

She added: 'The big difference has come from modern treatments being used for women from all classes. As a result, it appears death rates have fallen faster among the lower social classes.'

The professor also questioned the reliability of figures showing a ten per cent rise in death rates from breast cancer among professional women in the late 1990s.

Professor Beral said: 'A very small number of women are included in this social class ranking, which could affect the statistical interpretation. It's important to remember that survival has been improving during this time.'

Other ONS figures released yesterday show that people in rural areas live almost a decade longer than those in cities.

According to statistics for the past two years, Rutland has the highest life expectancy at almost 80, while Manchester's is the lowest at just 71 for men and 77.3 for women. The national average is 75.9 for men and 80.6 for women.

Liberal Democrat health spokesman Paul Burstow said 'This shocking gap between the lowest and highest life expectancy in the country must be a wake-up call to Ministers that this Government has let health inequalities slip down the agenda.

'There is evidence here of not just a North-South divide but a number of different divides - rural versus urban areas and rich versus poor.

'A top priority for the Department of Health has to be tackling the root causes of ill-health, not just treating the symptoms.'

The study also showed that suicides among men aged 15 to 44 hit a peak in the late 1990s.

Infant mortality figures showed that babies born outside marriage to parents living separately were 42 per cent more at risk than others.

The ONS also examined a six per cent rise in stillbirths in England and Wales in 2002, compared with the previous year. But it found no clear links with birthweight, age of mother, gestation, sex or mother's country of birth.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

