TITLE	Mouth cancer: ladettes blamed

by ROBIN YAPP, Daily Mail

Binge-drinking and smoking are to blame for a rapid increase in mouth cancer among young women, researchers have warned.

A 'ladette' culture has seen the number of cases of the disease rocket in recent years, with women as young as 19 affected.

Experts believe the trend is also linked to the rising number of women delaying getting married and having children to concentrate-on their careers.

A 'work hard, play hard' attitude in young professionals has seen many indulging in heavy smoking and alcohol as a release from the pressures of the workplace.

Scientists at King's College London found that smoking and drinking were risk factors in threequarters of all mouth cancers.

They looked at 116 cases of the disease in people under 45 and found that 40 per cent of victims were in one of the two highest social classes.

In the past, heavy-smoking, working-class men have been at greatest risk.

'Our data shows that smoking, drinking and poor diet are major risk factors and the younger that people start smoking and drinking, the higher the risk,' said Professor Newell Johnson, lead author of the study.

Figures from Cancer Research UK back up Professor Johnson's conclusions. They show that the incidence of oral cancer in women under 45 increased by 47 per cent from 1990 to 1999, whereas in women over that age it rose by only 22 per cent.

The disease is diagnosed in around 4,300 people a year in the UK and killed almost 1,700 victims in 2001. That figure is forecast to rise sharply in the next ten years, with people in their twenties and thirties increasingly vulnerable.

Alcohol awareness groups fear that career women are particularly at risk as they delay getting married and are more likely to continue drinking heavily than young mothers.

Early detection of mouth cancer can increase the chances of survival from 50 per cent to nearly 90 per cent - but it so rarely happens that fewer than half of people diagnosed are alive five years later.

One reason for this is that more than 10 per cent of the population - six million people - have not been to a dentist in the past five years. The British Dental Association said they were missing out on routine check-ups that 'could save their lives'.

Tobacco smoke is known to carry cancer- causing chemicals that have been linked to millions of cases of lung cancer. Doctors believe that alcohol is able to dissolve some of these poisons as we drink, causing them to attack the lining of the mouth.

The latest warning comes just three months after the Government revealed plans for a campaign aimed at reducing bingedrinking by young women.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

