TITLE	Can the sun stop cancer?

by TIM UTTON, Daily Mail

Staying out of the sun could actually increase your chance of getting cancer, doctors are warning.

They say lack of sunlight makes people more vulnerable to a range of cancers which kill more than 38,000 Britons a year.

The latest advice is in contrast to regular warnings about covering up in the sun to avoid skin cancer, particularly malignant melanoma.

The sun's rays are a key source of vitamin D, which reduces the risk of colon, breast, prostate and other cancers.

Vitamin D - the 'sun vitamin' which is produced by the body in response to solar exposure - has been shown to kill some tumours and stop others from growing in the first place.

So staying in the shade can increase the risk of cancer, according to an expert at the University of California.

Professor Cedric Garland said UK residents should try to get some sun every day, when the weather allows, to allow adequate build-up of vitamin D.

Writing in the British Medical Journal, Professor Garland said: 'Advice to avoid the sun would not be the best strategy for reducing overall incidence of cancer.

'Recommending moderate exposure to the sun would be more prudent. Solar exposure is the main source of vitamin D.

'Residents of the UK should aim for ten to 15 minutes a day in the sun when the weather allows, without sunscreen, to allow adequate synthesis of vitamin D.'

Professor Garland added that people in the UK should take supplements of vitamin D in winter.

He said: 'People in the UK cannot synthesise vitamin D from November to the end of March, [so] they become deficient by December.'

Earlier this year Cancer Research UK launched its ' Sunsmart' campaign, which stressed the importance of staying out of the sun completely between 11am and 3pm, and always covering up with sunscreen, hats and T-shirts in the sun.

Malignant melanoma, the most dangerous form of skin cancer, kills up to 1,600 Britons every year, and cases are rising faster than any other type of cancer in the UK.

However, the combined death toll of breast, prostate and colon cancer was 38,000 last year.

According to Dr Damian Downing, editor of the Journal of Nutrition and Environmental Medicine, we need 4,000iu of vitamin D for optimal cancer prevention - ten times the recommended daily intake of 400iu (international units).

Professor Garland's advice tallies with other research which found that childhood disease of rickets is on the rise again. Experts say inactive children are not getting enough sunlight and not consuming enough milk and dairy products.

But cancer charities urged caution over Professor Garland's comments.

Sara Hiom of Cancer Research UK said: 'People don't need to seek out the sun to get Vitamin D; they are most likely to get all they need from going out and about in their daily routine.

'Our diet is also an important source of Vitamin D; dairy products, some meats, eggs and fish oils all contain this important vitamin.

'We do not advocate complete avoidance of the sun, but we caution against sun exposure that leads to tanning and burning, both of which are evidence of skin damage that can lead to skin cancer.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

