TITLE	Pollution increases lung cancer risk

Air pollution caused by traffic and industry may increase the risk of developing lung cancer, research said today.

A study of more than 16,000 men found those exposed to higher levels of pollution were at an increased risk of the disease.

The authors, writing in the journal Thorax, said the risk still existed even when other factors like smoking, age and income were taken into consideration.

While they accepted that smoking posed the greatest threat of lung cancer, they said this did not explain the difference in disease levels between rural and urban areas.

The team, from the Norwegian Institute of Public Health in Oslo, monitored the health of 16,209 men, aged 40 to 49, between 1971 and 1998.

The average levels of air pollution the men would have been exposed to were estimated by the Norwegian Institute for Air Research for every year between 1974- and 1995.

During the study, 418 men developed lung cancer. The researchers estimated the risk of developing lung cancer was 8 per cent higher for men living where ambient levels of nitrogen oxide, mainly produced by traffic, increased by 10 micrograms per cubic metre between 1974 and 1978.

For sulphur dioxide, where heating was said to be the main source, the risk increased by 1 per cent. They noted: "Urban air pollution may increase the risk of developing lung cancer in men.

"Compared with smoking the association between air pollution and lung cancer is weak but of expected size."

The researchers suggested that exposure to nitrogen oxide and sulphur dioxide were not likely to cause cancer by themselves but could be indicators that other cancer-causing agents were present in the air.

Professor Stephen Spiro, of the British Thoracic Society, said: "This is yet another study which reinforces a small but significant link between urban air pollution and the risk of developing lung cancer.

 "Air pollution does not discriminate between young and old - it is therefore essential that we all work together to minimise pollution levels. "We must also conduct further in-depth studies investigating this link."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

