TITLE	Oranges 'cut cancer risk'

by TIM UTTON, Daily Mail

An orange a day is the best bet for keeping cancer away, according to scientists.

Researchers believe eating the citrus fruit can cut the risk of some examples of the disease by up to 50 per cent.

They also found that consuming an extra serving can reduce the risk of a stroke by 19 per cent.

As well as providing vitamins and fibre, citrus fruits boost the immune system and fight the growth of tumours.

But few Britons are consuming enough fruit and vegetables to gain the full benefit.

Only 13 per cent of men and 15 per cent of women eat the recommended five portions of fruit and vegetables a day, according to the Department of Health.

The latest study found that consuming citrus fruits could cut the risk of mouth, larynx and stomach cancers by up to 50 per cent. These cancers alone kill more than 8,000 Britons a year.

Researcher Dr Katrine Baghurst said: 'Citrus fruits protect the body through their antioxidant properties and by strengthening the immune system, inhibiting tumour growth and normalising tumour cells.

'There is strong scientific evidence to show that these protective attributes can reduce the risk of cancer.

'Unfortunately the average fruit and vegetable intake is well below the five daily servings recommended in dietary guidelines.'

The research was carried out by the Australia's Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, and was based on 48 international studies on the health effects of citrus fruits.

Dr Baghurst said that of all fruit, oranges have the highest level of antioxidants, which 'mop up' harmful toxins called free radicals.

He added: 'We have also found convincing evidence of positive effects of citrus consumption on obesity and Type 2 diabetes because the fruit is low in fat and energy.'

The Government launched a campaign this year urging people to eat five portions of fruit and vegetables a day, saying it would cut deaths from heart disease and cancer by 20 per cent.

One portion is equivalent to a slice of melon, an apple, orange or banana, or two serving spoons of green leafy vegetables such as broccoli or spinach.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

