TITLE	How a salt-heavy diet can double cancer risk

by TIM UTTON, Daily Mail

A diet overloaded with salt is putting millions of us at twice the risk of contracting stomach cancer, research has revealed.

Processed foods and ready meals are among the worst culprits.

But even everyday items such as bacon, bread and baked beans can boost salt to dangerous levels in the body.

Eating just 12g of salt a day doubles the likelihood of stomach cancer, which kills more than 6,400 Britons a year, Cancer Research UK said yesterday.

The recommended daily allowance is 6g for an adult, less than a quarter of an ounce.

In Britain, we eat an average of 9g a day and millions of people are likely to consume even more due to the increasing popularity of processed foods, ready meals and junk foods which contain high amounts of salt.

Some ready meals - particularly curries, Chinese dishes and pizzas - contain virtually all the daily salt allowance in a single serving.

Heart risk increase

Aside from cancer, a high-salt diet is already known to increase risk of heart attack and stroke. Dr Tim Key, an epidemiologist for Cancer Research UK, said: 'This study shows strong associations of stomach cancer with the intake of highly-salted foods.

'It underlines the importance of limiting salt intake in our daily diet, not only to reduce the risk of stomach cancer, but also to protect against heart disease.

'What we don't know is whether it is specifically the salt in these foods that can cause cancer or a combination of salt and other chemicals. But limiting salt intake is also important for reducing the risk for high blood pressure and cardiovascular disease.'

There are around 10,000 new cases of stomach cancer in the UK every year, mainly in the over-55s. High salt intake can induce atrophic gastritis, which is a precursor to this form of the disease.

Stomach cancer

The latest study looked at 40,000 middle-aged people in Japan, examining their dietary, drinking and smoking habits over an 11-year period. Those consuming 12-15g of salt a day were found to run twice the risk of stomach cancer.

Lead researcher Dr Shoichiro Tsugane said: 'In addition to salt intake, our study also shows that smoking and low consumption of fruit and vegetables increases the risk of stomach cancer, particularly in men.'

His findings are published in the British Journal of Cancer.

For children aged one to six, the target salt intake is 2g a day, and for children aged seven to 14, it is 5g. Each pinch added at the table is about 0.25g, while a teaspoon is 5g.

The Government has urged the British food industry to cut salt levels in products by February or face tough new measures.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

