TITLE	Sunshine holiday cancer soars

By Jenny Hope Medical Correspondent

Foreign holidays in the sun have triggered an epidemic of deadly skin cancers, alarming figures show.

Cases of malignant melanoma rose by 16 per cent in a year and have leapt 24 per cent in just five years.

It is a stark warning of the dangers of over-exposure to the sun as Britons increasingly take both winter and summer breaks, say experts.

Malignant melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer, killing one in four victims on average.

There were 6,967 cases diagnosed in the UK in 2000, compared with 5,990 in 1999. In 1995, there were 5,626 cases.

Deaths have rocketed since the 1960s, when the fashion for sunbathing holidays took off.

But campaigners say cases are climbing again because people spend more time in winter heading for sunspots and skiing without protection from ultraviolet rays - which are intensified at high altitudes.

Richard Hoey of Cancer Research UK, which released the figures yesterday, said the tragedy is that malignant melanoma is almost entirely preventable.

He added: "It's a huge increase in just a year and shows that the message about the dangers of sun exposure are not getting through.

"The main cause is spending more time in the sun without taking precautions to minimise the damage.

"Many more people are now spending time abroad on holidays at all times of the year and, of course, if we see a consistent rise in temperatures at home, that will increase the risk."

Record levels of sunshine

Records showed that 2003 was one of the UK's sunniest years ever. Mr Hoey said one of the most worrying aspects of the epidemic is that sunbathing puts people of all ages at risk, whereas cancer is normally more common in older age groups.

His charity now has Government funding of &pound;150,000 for an annual SunSmart campaign giving advice to holidaymakers about sensible behavour in the sun.

Advice includes: Stay in the shade between 11am and 3pm; make sure you never burn; always cover up; use factor 15+ sunscreen and reapply often; keep babies out of the sun completely; and report mole changes or unusual skin growths promptly to your doctor. Mr Hoey said: "We know sun awareness campaigns can make a difference.

"In Australia, there has been an increase in early detection of malignant melanoma and survival rates are excellent. Everyone knows about looking for moles."

Figures show 7,850 melanoma cases are diagnosed in Australia each year - almost 1,000 more than in the UK - yet the number of deaths is 1,000 a year compared to 1,600 in Britain.

Other figures compiled by the UK Association of Cancer Registries show cancer cases running at record levels, with numbers rising steadily since the early 1970s. Overall, there were 270,000 cases diagnosed in the UK in 2000. That is 3,000 more than in the previous year and almost 15,000 more than five years previously.

For men, prostate cancer cases rose by 25 per cent over five years to a high of 27,200.

However, most of the rise is attributed to increased detection through the Prostate Specific Antigen blood test used in older men.

The majority of men who get a positive result from the test will not develop the life-threatening form of the disease.

During the late 1990s, the death rate for prostate cancer of around 9,500 cases a year started to decline.

Cases of breast cancer increased by 12 per cent over the five years to 40,700 in 2000, although there was a fall of 600 cases between 1999 and 2000.

Experts say the increases in cancers are partly due to people living longer which puts them at higher risk.

However, a 17 per cent rise in cases of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma is also partly likely to be the result of more sensitive diagnostic techniques and there have been falls in cervical and stomach cancers.

Success in cutting smoking rates in Scotland has led to a cut in lung cancers in men by 15 per cent in the last five years.

ANNA West was just 20 when a small white mole on her back, no larger than the nail on her little finger, was diagnosed as malignant. Twelve months later, soon after she had graduated from Cardiff University, she was dead.

Anna, from Winchester, Hampshire, had a classically pale English complexion, so her parents always took great care to protect her from the sun.

On family camping holidays in France during the summer, she was smothered in suncream.

Even when she went swimming, she wore a T-shirt for protection.

However, from the age of around 12, she began reading teen magazines, started becoming interested in the latest fashions and wanted a tan. Her mother Janet, 54, said: 'At 14, Anna went on holiday to Spain with a schoolfriend who was also a redhead. Her parents took great care to keep the girls out of the blazing sun.

'But on the last day of the holiday, frustrated that she would be returning as pale as she had gone out, Anna slipped out to lie on the beach.

'She lay on her front with no suncream on her back, and the result was terrible.' Mrs West added: 'Her back turned a shocking pink, and she was in great pain on the flight home. 'We were told later that the melanoma - which developed within a mole she had had on her back since birth - could have been caused by those few hours of sunbathing.'

During Anna's second year at Cardiff University, she became worried about the mole on her back, which had begun to bleed. She visited a GP, who referred her for a biopsy.

Six months later, the mole was removed at the University Hospital of Wales in Cardiff, but the cancer returned. Despite further operations and chemotherapy, Anna died in February 2001, aged 21. She had managed to graduate just months before her death despite the terrible pain she suffered as the melanoma spread through her body.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

