TITLE	Asprin link to cancer risk

By ISABEL OAKESHOTT, Evening Standard

Aspirin was at the centre of a health scare today amid evidence it could cause pancreatic cancer.

New research suggests those who use the painkiller regularly over a long period are up to 86 per cent more likely to develop the killer disease.

The findings will worry millions of people who take the pills every day because of their powers to prevent heart disease and strokes. It is the first serious question over the safety of regular use of the so-called "wonder drug".

Today experts warned doctors to take account of the possible risk and called for more research to assess the dangers.

The scare follows a study involving almost 90,000 women in America. More than a third of the women were regular aspirin users - reflecting the widespread popularity of the drug. Sales of the medication soared in Britain last year after it emerged that a daily dose may lower the risk of Alzheimer's disease by up to 70 per cent.

Thousands also take the pills before long-haul flights to ward off deep-vein thrombosis (DVT).

But the study found that women who took two or more aspirins a week for more than 20 years had a 58 per cent increased risk of pancreatic cancer compared with women who rarely, or never, used the medication. The risk of pancreatic cancer rose the more aspirins were taken. Compared with non-users, women who took 14 or more aspirins a week had an 86 per cent increased risk of pancreatic cancer.

The authors of the study, published by US-based National Cancer Institute, conclude: "Aspirin appears to increase the risk of pancreatic cancer after extended periods of use.

Risks and benefits have to be weighed carefully in any recommendations made by healthcare providers."

Pancreatic cancer is one of the most challenging cancers to treat, with a 95 per cent mortality rate.

About 3,000 people are diagnosed with the disease each year in Britain, making it one of the least common cancers. Rates are far higher in the US.

Aspirin is one of the UK's best-selling non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs.

Today experts in Britain played down the fears.

Nick Henderson, of information group Aspirin Foundation, said: "People should not be unduly worried. All the evidence suggests that aspirin has great health benefits, not the opposite."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

