TITLE	New evidence in cancer debate

New evidence has emerged in the controversial debate over whether antiperspirants and deodorants are linked to soaring levels of breast cancer in the UK.

Scientists detected the preservative chemical parabens - used in some underarm products, make-up and foods - in samples of breast cancer tumours.

But the cosmetics industry and cancer experts urged the public not to panic over the new research, pointing out scientists had not found any causal link between the ingredients of the products and cancer

The possibility of chemicals in antiperspirants being linked to cancer first emerged on the Internet some years ago and has since been the subject of several studies, most notably by Dr Philippa Darbre from Reading University.

She has previously said aluminium and zirconium in cosmetics could affect hormone levels, raising the risk of cancer.

Her latest study, published in the Journal of Applied Toxicology, looked at 20 human breast tumours, measuring the concentration of parabens in the tissue.

Her team found the chemicals were present in a form suggesting that their route of entry was topical - through the skin - rather than oral.

Dr Darbre said: "Parabens are used as preservatives in thousands of cosmetic, food and pharmaceutical products, but this is the first study to show their accumulation in human tissues.

"It demonstrates if people are exposed to these chemicals, then the chemicals will accumulate in their bodies."

She added: "Their detection in human breast tumours is of concern since parabens have been shown to be able to mimic the action of the female hormone oestrogen and oestrogen can drive the growth of human breast tumours. It would therefore seem especially prudent to consider whether parabens should continue to be used in such a wide range of cosmetics applied to the breast area, including antiperspirants and deodorants."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

