TITLE	Deodorants linked to cancer

by ROBIN YAPP, Daily Mail

Alarming new evidence of a possible link between anti-perspirants and breast cancer emerged yesterday.

Scientists found chemicals called parabens, used as preservatives in the underarm products, in cancerous breast tumours.

The lead author of the report urged women to cut down on or ditch deodorants and anti-perspirants. Dr Phillippa Darbre said the research added to growing evidence of a link between increasing rates of the disease and the huge market for underarm sprays and roll-ons.

Cosmetics manufacturers and cancer charities said there was no proof of the threat and called for further research.

"My advice is to cut down or cut out," said Dr Darbre, a breast cancer specialist at the University of Reading. "I used anti-perspirants myself until eight years ago and I never use them now and wonder why I ever did.

"Some women may use vast quantities and never have any problems but women with genetic histories of breast cancer may be extra sensitive to these chemicals.

"I would love to see women with a family history of breast cancer stop using them as a precautionary measure. It's going to be very difficult to ever prove that underarm cosmetics are a cause of breast cancer but this is another piece in the jigsaw that fits."

Breast cancer doubled

New cases of breast cancer have doubled in the past 25 years to around 40,000 a year. Around 13,000 women a year die from it. Rates in men have doubled over the same period to 300 a year.

Concerns about anti-perspirants centre on the fact that parabens mimic the effects of the hormone oestrogen, which is known to stimulate tumours in two thirds of women with breast cancer.

Dr Darbre's published evidence last year that most breast cancer tumours occur in the 'upper and outer section' of the left breast - the area where anti-perspirants are most likely to be applied.

She said the proportion in this "quadrant" was 61 per cent in 1994 compared to 31 per cent in 1926 when use of deodorants and anti-perspirants was rare.

Her team analysed samples of breast tumours from 20 different women. They found parabens in all but two of the samples, in a form which suggested they had probably been absorbed through the skin.

As well as body odour products, parabens are found in many other cosmetics including perfumes, sun creams and body lotions, and are used as preservatives in a variety of foods.

This was the first study to confirm that they can be absorbed in human tissue. Dr Darbre now plans to test non-cancerous human breast tissue for traces of parabens to find out whether the levels found in tumours were significantly higher.

Previous studies have shown high levels of industrial pollutants such as PCBs and dioxins in breast milk which scientists fear could also trigger cancer.

"The breast is like the dust bin of the body these days," added Dr Darbre. "God knows what this cocktail of chemicals does to women."

Delyth Morgan, of Breakthrough Breast Cancer, said: "This extremely small study does not demonstrate a direct causal link between deodorant or anti-perspirant use and developing breast cancer.

"Further research is needed to establish the source of the chemicals found in the breast tumour samples and what, if any, the relationship is to breast cancer."

Dr Richard Sullivan, head of clinical programmes at Cancer Research UK, added: "No causal relationship has ever been found between underarm cosmetics containing parabens and breast cancer. Should any notional risk exist it would be insignificant when compared to other avoidable environmental risks for the disease such as obesity."

Dr Chris Flower, of the Cosmetic, Toiletry and Perfumery Association, said: "Most deodorants and anti-perspirants do not contain parabens and those that do are a small proportion of the market. Contents are always listed on the label."

The UK market for such products is worth &pound;400million.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

