TITLE	Do deodorants cause cancer?

by MARIANNE POWER, Daily Mail

Research into a possible link between breast cancer and anti-perspirant deodorants hit the headlines yesterday after molecular biologist Dr Phillippa Darbre reported that chemicals called parabens were found in 18 out of the 20 breast tumour samples analysed.

Parabens are used as preservatives in some deodorants as well as other products used in the underarm area such as body spray, shaving gel and suntan lotion. They are thought to mimic the effects of the hormone oestrogen which can promote tumours.

This is the first study to confirm that parabens may be absorbed by human tissue and it follows up findings a year ago that most breast cancer tumours occur in the upper and outer section of the left breast, where - as most of us are right handed - anti-perspirant deodorants are frequently applied in exactly the same place.

Based on this research - which was published in the Journal of Applied Toxicology - Dr Darbre, of Reading University, advises all women to "cut down or cut out" anti-perspirants, especially those with a history of breast cancer.

She says: "I would love to see women with a family history of breast cancer stop using them as a precautionary measure'. She stopped using anti-perspirants eight years ago and adds: 'We need to be concerned about the level of chemicals we are using. Everything is toxic at high levels."

Her view is highly controversial and cancer experts disagree that we should curb the use of deodorants. They call for a balanced reaction to the research.

Dr Richard Sullivan, Cancer Research UK's head of clinical programmes, said: "This research does not in any way prove that anti-perspirants are a risk factor in cancer."

And while he supports any work that aims to track down possible causes of cancer he stressed that wider studies, taking in far greater numbers of women, were needed before parabens could be said to be dangerous.

He added: "Parabens may increase the proliferation of cancer cells in a test tube, but so do a lot of other chemicals. The increased proliferation of cells is only one element of causing cancer and it does not prove that parabens are carcinogenic."

Cancer is increasing between one and two per cent every year, but this can be explained by many factors. "We are an ageing population and breast cancer risk increases with age. There are also important social and cultural changes which can be linked to the increase in breast cancer.

"Women are getting their periods earlier, are having children later in life and breast feeding less - which all increase the exposure of the breast to hormones that can increase cancer.

"In the post-menopausal age group, which has the highest risk of breast cancer, the increase in obesity and HRT are factors.

"So many chemicals have a tenuous link with cancer, it would be a very hard life to live if you tried to cut out every risk.

"If there is a risk it would be absolutely tiny in comparison to other factors we have identified - namely smoking and obesity. It may be obvious but if you smoke, stop, and if you are a non-smoker, eat a balanced and healthy diet. People should not stop buying anti-perspirants."

Parabens have been used as preservatives for decades in a range of products from cosmetics to food and pharmaceuticals. The four main ones are: methyl, ethyl, propyl and butylparabens. Many products contain more two or more, but they are always clearly marked on the label.

Sangeeta Haindle, spokes-person for Breast Cancer Campaign, agrees that we should not over-react. "This research offers no conclusive evidence that the chemicals in deodorants and cosmetics cause breast cancer," she says.

"We do not want people to start throwing things out of their bathroom cabinets."

For those concerned about the latest findings it is interesting to note that very few of today's leading brands actually contain parabens. Indeed, Dr Chris Flower, of the Cosmetic Toiletry and Perfumery Association, is baffled by the link made by Dr Darbre. He says: "Almost all the big name deodorants do not contain parabens.

"On the whole, deodorant is self-preserving and doesn't need them. The one we have found to contain parabens is a very old one that is no longer available in shops. On the other hand, about half of ordinary cosmetics do contain parabens - especially emulsion products such as creams and foundations.

"So there is no logic in connecting a concern about parabens specifically with anti-perspirant deodorants over other products. I have spoken to the Reading team to say as much but it doesn't appear that they have listened."

So if we don't have to throw out our anti-perspirants, should we at least be ditching the sun creams, moisturisers and body sprays that do list parabens among their ingredients? Not according to Dr Flower.

"Parabens have a very good safety record," he says. "You could almost dine on them without a problem. Research shows that very little paraben is absorbed into the skin - and if it is absorbed it is broken down into a completely harmless substance."

Dr Darbre admits that "most deodorants no longer contain parabens because many manufacturers removed them three years ago". But she remains firm in her conviction that the study suggests more research is needed to rule out any possible link between parabens and breast cancer.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

