TITLE	Shaving may raise cancer risk

by ROBIN YAPP, Daily Mail

The risk of breast cancer from anti-perspirants could be heightened by underarm shaving, scientists have warned.

The alert comes days after researchers issued a warning that deodorants could pose a threat.

In the latest study, analysis of a group of breast cancer patients found that those who used the products and shaved under their arms had contracted the disease up to 14 years younger than those who did neither.

The scientists who carried out the investigation concluded that shaven skin might more easily absorb suspect chemicals.

They suggested it might be wise for women to find "alternative hygiene habits".

Last week, British researchers found traces of parabens, a preservative used in some anti-perspirants, in breast tumours. They warned women to "cut down on or cut out" their use.

The British market for deodorants and anti-perspirants is worth &pound;400million.

Breast cancer rates in the UK have doubled in 25 years to around 40,000 cases annually, 13,000 of which are fatal.

Cancer charities dismiss claims

But cancer charities and cosmetics manufacturers insisted last night there was no proof that the products can cause cancer.

They said the findings could be explained by the fact that girls now reach puberty earlier. Puberty leads to increased levels of oestrogen in the body, a factor related to two-thirds of all breast cancer tumours.

The new study, detailed in New Scientist magazine, questioned 437 female breast cancer patients in the U.S.

Those who used anti-perspirant or deodorant sprays or roll-ons at least two times and shaved under their arms at least three times in a week had an average age of 53 when they were diagnosed with cancer.

Those who did not shave or use body odour products at all were not diagnosed until 67 on average. The figure for all women who used anti-perspirants and shaved, regardless of how often, was 59.

Lead researcher Dr Kris McGrath, from Northwestern University in Chicago, said: "Underarm shaving with anti-perspirant or deodorant use may play a role in breast cancer.

"Until further studied, alternative hygiene habits should be considered to possibly reduce the risk of breast cancer."

Dr McGrath said he could not explain how deodorants might cause cancer but pointed the finger of suspicion at aluminium compounds which are used to promote dryness.

Breast cancer link

The earlier study, by molecular biologist Dr Phillippa Darbre, of Reading University, centred on the discovery of parabens in breast tumours.

Dr Darbre has also claimed in the past that aluminium compounds could cause breast cancer.

But Dr Chris Flower, of the Cosmetic, Toiletry and Perfumery Association, said: "There is a general trend for girls to reach puberty earlier which is a well-known risk factor for breast cancer. Deodorants and anti-perspirants are safe, always have been and always will be."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

