TITLE	Another HRT cancer scare

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Doctors have halted another major HRT study because women were being made to face an "unacceptably high risk" of breast cancer.

Now thousands of British women who are using HRT after surviving breast cancer may be told to come off the drug.

In 2002, a similar study in the U.S. was stopped because increased health risks emerged.

The latest research had been set up in Sweden to assess the effect of hormone replacement therapy to ease symptoms of the menopause among breast cancer survivors.

The cancer treatment can actually trigger the menopause in younger women.

The study had been intended to last for five years, monitoring women taking either a combination of oestrogen and progestogen hormones, oestrogen alone or non-hormonal therapy. But it was halted three years early when results showed that HRT significantly increased the chances of recurring breast cancer or a new tumour.

The decision was based on results from 345 women the researchers had been following for two years.

Of the 174 who were given HRT, 26 had a recurrence or a new case of breast cancer.

That compared with only seven among those taking the best non-hormonal treatments for menopausal symptoms, says a report in an online publication by The Lancet medical journal.

Women advised to discontinue treatment

Lead investigator Lars Holmberg, from the University Hospital in Uppsala, said: "Women on active treatment have been advised to discontinue. However, the women in the trial will be followed up for many years."

Although there were fears that HRT might increase the chances of the cancer coming back - oestrogen is known to promote some types of breast cancer - women recruited to the trial were prepared to run the risk.

Half did not get HRT but received advice on non-hormonal ways of controlling symptoms such as hot flushes and night sweats. These included reflexology, acupuncture and massage.

At least 3,000 British breast cancer survivors are taking part in a similar trial by Cancer Research UK, launched two years ago. There will now be a review to see if that should continue.

Dr Richard Sullivan, Cancer Research UK's head of clinical programmes, said the charity had supported the trial since it opened but would now reconsider its future.

He said: "It's an important study which was extensively and independently assessed before it started and is now being reviewed in the light of the new evidence from Sweden."

Serious concerns about the safety of HRT were first raised in 2002 when the largest-ever trial was abandoned.

The U.S. Women's Health Initiative study of more than 16,000 older women was stopped after five years - three years early - because it revealed higher risks of breast cancer, heart attack and stroke.

Dr Sullivan said the question of whether women who develop breast cancer early in their lives could safely take HRT might never be settled as a result of the decision to halt the Swedish study, which actually consisted of two trials.

He said: "One found evidence that HRT was increasing the risk of breast cancer, the other didn't, so it would have been a difficult decision to call the trials to a halt."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

