TITLE	Cream to zap skin cancers

By MARTYN HALLE, Daily Mail

A new light treatment is set to save thousands of people from having disfiguring surgery to remove skin cancers.

The commonest forms of skin cancer are easily treatable, and there is little risk of death if they are detected early. The problem is that most patients have to undergo minor surgery to dig out the cancer from the skin - and this can leave unsightly scars.

Now a form of light treatment called photo dynamic therapy (PDT) is removing cancers and pre-cancerous growths without leaving a mark.

It works by activating a light sensitive cream which is painted on to the growth before treatment. The light triggers a chemical that destroys the cancerous cells with virtually no disruption to the skin.

PDT is best known as a pioneering new treatment for helping to slow down age-related macular degeneration - a serious eye condition which can result in blindness. But PDT has found a growing use in treatment for skin cancer, particularly growths on the head and neck.

Prevents cutting

Dr Colin Morton, of Falkirk Infirmary, is one of a handful of dermatologists already using the new method, and he expects PDT for skin cancer to spread to other hospitals.

"PDT is very good for removing what are known as basal cell or squamous cell carcinomas, as well as pre- cancers known as keratoses," he says.

"Previously, we would have had to cut them out. But that can present problems because a lot of these cancers tend to appear on the face and neck, which are the areas of the body most exposed to sunlight.

"Also, patients may have several areas that need treating, so it can be disfiguring."

"The other problem with surgical removal is that there is a greater chance of some cancerous cells remaining. With light treatment, using Metvix cream, there is a 95 per cent first-time success rate."

Not all skin cancers can be moved using light treatment. At present, PDT will only go to a certain depth, but trials are continuing to see if it can be used to remove more deepseated growths.

Sarah's story

One patient successfully treated with PDT is 36-year-old businesswoman Sarah McGuire, who lives with her boyfriend and business partner Nick Moss, 33. She originally had surgery to remove three cancerous growths from her back.

Sarah, from West Linton, near Edinburgh, says: "I was left with some quite significant scars on my back, which I found disfiguring. I was worried that I'd need more surgery and have more scars.

"Fortunately, Dr Morton had just started using PDT, and my consultant at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary referred me to him."

Sarah believes her skin cancers were triggered by her previous jobs working outdoors as a PE teacher then ski instructor. She had three treatment sessions in one visit. "The cream was put on several hours beforehand, so that it sank into the skin," she says.

"Then I went back to have the light shone on the growths. Each growth took about 15 minutes to treat. There was no pain and Dr Morton was able to tell me at the end that he had cleared all the cancer cells."

Sarah is pleased that the growths have gone without any scarring, and is happy that if the growths do recur they can also be treated with light therapy.

"Nick says he doesn't really notice the scarring on my back, but if I had surgery on my face for future growths it would be very disfiguring," she says.

Skin cancer on the increase

All skin cancers are currently on the increase. Unlike melanoma, most skin cancers are non-aggressive, but there is still a five per cent risk that basal and squamous cell carcinomas could spread to other parts of the body.

"Patients with these types of cancer will have crusty patches of skin, or lumpy red areas which look suspicious and should be checked out," says Dr Morton.

"While figures for melanoma skin cancer are not rising as quickly, we are seeing a lot more of these less serious cancers. Like melanoma, they are due to sun exposure.

"The good news is these less serious forms tend to respond well to treatment - and light therapy is ideal."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

