TITLE	'Cancer' liver transplant killed husband

By JAMES TOZER, Daily Mail

A father was given a cancerous liver in a transplant but doctors failed to warn him until six months after they had found out.

Former police constable Peter Dickinson, 42, died two months after they finally told him.

Yesterday his family demanded to know why they had been kept in the dark for so long.

His widow Dee, 41, said: "If they had told him there was a risk as soon as they found out, he would have been able to fight it. By the time they did, it was too late."

Inquest

Mrs Dickinson and her two children found out the full sequence of events for the first time at an inquest yesterday.

They said swifter action might have saved his life, and rejected his surgeon's claim he had wanted to spare them more trauma.

Mr Dickinson, of Morecambe, Lancashire, had chronic liver disease and may have had only days to live without the operation.

Doctors later found a tumour on another organ taken from the same donor, meaning there was a risk that Mr Dickinson's new liver might also be cancerous.

'Playing God'

As Mrs Dickinson and her children, Krista, 20, and Gareth, 19, looked on, surgeon Raj Prasad told the hearing why doctors had decided not to tell him.

"At that stage, it was felt the risk was so minimal that telling Peter and putting him through the trauma was not the right thing to do," he said. Tragically, the liver was cancerous and when a tumour was spotted six months later, doctors admitted they had kept the risk from Mr Dickinson.

His daughter, a telephone operator, added: "It shouldn't have been up to them - the doctors were playing God."

Her mother added: "After the transplant, we went for check-ups every week but we were given no inkling that something was wrong.

"If there was a chance he had cancer, why didn't they tell him? I've lost my faith in doctors."

Legal action

The family is considering legal action to find out if more could have been done for Mr Dickinson.

The keen sportsman received the liver at St James's University Hospital, Leeds, in July 2002. Other organs from the 26-year-old donor were given to another patient.

But in November, the donated pancreas was rejected by the recipient's body and, when it was removed, doctors found a tumour.

Coroner Howard McCann said 'an unbelievable series of misfortunes' had befallen Mr Dickinson.

Although cancer amounted to natural causes, he recorded a verdict of misadventure at the hearing in Lancaster as the disease resulted from an operation.

Screening

The NHS's UK Transplant authority said it was not possible to screen organs for cancer with absolute certainty but added that Mr Dickinson's fate was very rare.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

