TITLE	Breast cancer screening: the facts

by ANDREA PERRY, femail.co.uk

Last updated at 13:15 19 May 2005

Research now shows that Britain's breast-screening programme is saving many hundreds of lives.

In fact, by 2010 there will be 25 per cent fewer cancer-related deaths among older women.

But some women are still confused about whether they should be going for a test or are just plain nervous about the prospect of what being screened involves.

The UK has the highest incidence and mortality rates of breast cancer in the world. Over 35,000 women (and 250 men) are diagnosed with the disease in Britain each year. Of these, 13,000 die.

Here's our guide to the facts about breast-screening

What is involved in the test?

A mammogram - or breast X-ray. This is perfectly safe, though may cause some slight discomfort as the chest is pressed between two small X-ray plates. Two X-rays are taken. Firstly with X-ray plates above and below the breast, and secondly with the plates placed either side of the breast.

A mammogram will only detect the presence of a lump. It can not detect whether a lump is cancerous. Nine out of 10 lumps are non-cancerous.

If a lump is detected the patient will be referred to an oncologist who will perform a needle biopsy - the removal of a small amount of tissue with a thin needle - to determine whether the lump is cancerous.

Who is the NHS breast screening programme available to?

If you are between 50 and 70 you are entitled to be screened every three years as part of the National Breast Screening Programme (the upper age limit has recently been extended from 64 to 70, although it has not yet come into effect in all areas).

If you are over 70 (or 64 or over in areas where the new age limit has not yet come into effect) you will not be invited for screening. However, you are still at risk of breast cancer and entitled to free breast screening every three years on request.

Why only women of this age?

Breast tissue in younger women is denser so mammography doesn't work very well and is quite painful for a younger woman.

Also the risk of breast cancer increases after the menopause, which usually starts around the age of 50.

Younger women need an ultrasound to get an accurate image of the breast.

How often do you have to go?

Currently, the breast screening programme invites women in the target age group every three years. However, organisations are lobbying for recalls to be every year.

Will my doctor tell me when I need the test?

The system works by direct invitation from the screening unit for your area. Every woman will receive an invite to her home address with an appointment time and location, i.e: her local hospital or mobile screening unit.

Can women outside this age group have regular tests?

Some women, particularly those whose relatives have suffered breast cancer, are often anxious to have breast screening even if they fall outside the standard testing age.

If you are over 70 (or 65 or over in areas where the new age limit has not yet come into effect) you will not be invited for screening. However, you are still at risk of breast cancer and entitled to free breast screening every three years on request.

All you need to do is ask your GP or practice nurse to arrange an appointment for you, or you can contact the breast screening unit yourself.

Younger women can ask their GP who will assess each case on an individual basis. The GP can examine them and, if necessary, refer them to a specialist breast unit for an ultrasound.

Doctors may also advise younger women with a family history of breast cancer to check their breasts more regularly and, in rare cases, may offer genetic testing. Genetic testing, carried out through a blood test, can reveal whether a person is at increased risk of cancer because of their genes.

Why bother? Can't I just examine my breasts at home?

Yes, every woman should be familiar with how her breasts feel and consult her GP if anything abnormal happens.

But some lumps are so small they may not be detectable by touch alone. Mammograms can pick up a potential cancer at an early stage before it is big enough to be felt. Therefore women in the eligible age group should go for screening.

Who performs the test? Can you ask for a woman to do it?

Mammograms are always performed by women.

How long do you have to wait for the results?

Two weeks.

What if the test is abnormal?

The test will be repeated and if it is still abnormal the woman will be referred to a specialist breast unit for a clinical examination and biopsy - which involves drawing some cells from the lump with a fine needle.

What treatments are available?

Usually surgery. Either a lumpectomy - where only the lump is removed from the breast - or a mastectomy - where the entire breast is removed - followed by either radiotherapy or chemotherapy.

A woman may be able to have her breast reconstructed at the time of surgery and may be prescribed a hormone treatment like tamoxifen, to prevent the spread of breast cancer.

As every case is different, different women may be eligible for different surgery and drug therapy.

Always discuss with your consultant or GP and feel free to ask questions about the type of treatment you are receiving, or contact Breast Cancer Care (0808 800 6000).

How many lives does the screening programme save each year?

Latest research suggests that by 2010 the screening programme will reduce deaths from breast cancer by at least 25 per cent in the 55-64 age group.

However, it is difficult to be accurate as the screening programme is still fairly new. It is safe to say that survival rates are improving - from 68 per cent for 1986-90 to 73.7 per cent for 1991-93. Whether this is directly down to screening is under debate.

But early detection saves lives and by taking up your screening invitation, you are greatly improving your chances of survival.

Contact details

For more information about breast cancer or screening telephone the following helplines: Breast Cancer Care: 0808 800 6000 or the National Screening Programme: 0114 271 1060

 Breakthrough Breast Cancer is a charity fighting breast cancer through research and awareness. For further information call 020 7405 5111.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

