TITLE	Breast cancer breakthrough

Last updated at 11:54 11 March 2004

A new treatment for breast cancer which improves survival rates by a third was last night hailed as the biggest breakthrough against the disease for more than 20 years.

Early results from a major trial show women who use a sequence of two drugs dramatically cut the risk of their cancer coming back.

They took tamoxifen, the "gold standard" treatment for the disease, for two to three years before switching to the drug exemestane for the rest of their therapy.

Those who took tamoxifen for the full five years did not record such good results.

Each year, 41,000 British women develop breast cancer and it claims 13,000 lives.

Specialists believe that "aromatase inhibitors" such as exemestane will challenge tamoxifen as the standard treatment following surgery.

Of the 30,000 women who develop breast cancer after the menopause, around 20,000 are prescribed tamoxifen for five years after surgery because of its record in preventing the disease from recurring.

The research was co-ordinated by Cancer Research UK and studied 4,700 post-menopausal women worldwide, including 600 from Britain, for five years.

Patients switched drugs

They all started on tamoxifen but, after two or three years, half switched to exemestane. The others continued with tamoxifen. Results revealed yesterday showed the risk of breast cancer returning was cut by a third in those who switched compared with the women who stayed with tamoxifen.

For every 100 patients who changed to exemestane, eight had a recurrence within three years and 92 stayed free of cancer.

For every 100 patients who continued with tamoxifen, 13 had a recurrence within three years and 87 were cancer-free.

Taking the combination of drugs also cut the chance of a new cancer developing in the other breast by 50 per cent.

And there was a big drop in serious side-effects, including clotting, while the risk of other cancers seemed to be cut.

Dr John Toy, medical director of Cancer Research UK, said the study published in the New England Journal of Medicine was "a very exciting advance".

Judith Bliss, director of the charity's clinical trials and statistics unit, said the results were published before the study was officially finished because of their "magnitude and statistical certainty".

'Too many patients relapse'

Professor Charles Coombes said too many women relapse within five years of surgery because their cancer becomes resistant to tamoxifen.

"This is devastating," said Professor Coombes, director of the charity's laboratories at Imperial College, Hammersmith and Charing Cross Hospitals in London. "It can be a death sentence when it spreads to other sites in the body. In terms of changing the disease, these results show we are achieving something."

He said more research was needed on long-term side-effects, including possible bone thinning, but some women might benefit from the new treatment now.

Exemestane is licensed in the UK but only for patients with advanced breast cancer, not those in the early stages.

Guidance has not yet been issued by the Government.

Professor Coombes said other aromatase inhibitors, including anastrozole and letrazole, licensed for advanced breast cancer worked in a similar way to exemestane.

They are effective in two-thirds of patients where the tumours are stimulated by the female hormone oestrogen and only work in women who have passed the menopause. While tamoxifen works by blocking oestrogen's effects on cancer cells, aromatase inhibitors shut down the body's supply.

High cost of drugs

Routine preventive use of exemestane would cost around &pound;1,000 a year, about ten times higher than tamoxifen.

Delyth Morgan, chief executive of Breakthrough Breast Cancer, said exemestane and other aromatase inhibitors offer new ways of reducing the risk of the disease returning.

They provide women with a wide range of therapies to help fight the cancer, she added.

The trial was "extremely promising" but more research was needed into the long-term effectiveness and effects of exemestane, said Miss Morgan.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

