TITLE	The lifestyle choices that ruin your health

Carole Caplin

Last updated at 00:00 18 January 2004

Cancer risks A link between deodorants and breast cancer has been denied by manufacturers Britney Spears Has the singer pressed the selfdestruct button?

ALASTAIR MUIR/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY it's impossible to avoid some level of exposure to chemicals, pollutants and contaminants, but we can minimise that exposure by buying chemicalfree, organic products whenever and wherever possible. Did you know, for instance, that there are alternatives to chemically based deodorants?

Old-fashioned, pure, organic products sometimes but not always cost more, and can be harder to source than the mass-produced items thrust in our faces by supermarkets and chain stores. But the fact is, there are lots of healthy, safe options available, if only we make the effort to look. Blind trust, in my opinion, is a very unwise consumer choice.

CLOWNING AROUND If ever I run off to join the circus and believe me, there are times I'm tempted it will be to the Cirque du Soleil. As a longstanding fan, I couldn't think of any better way to celebrate my birthday last week than to take a group of friends to the Canada-based troupe's latest animal-free show at London's Royal Albert Hall.

The acrobatics and staging were hugely impressive, as usual, but the experience was not quite as magical as it has been in past years. Maybe it's just not possible to expect the Cirque's jugglers, trapeze artists and dancers to keep outdoing themselves year after year, but the sheer imaginative energy and originality of earlier shows was disappointingly absent in this latest production, the orientally themed Dralion.

I fear that the Cirque, which has now grown to the point where it has several troupes performing in different parts of the world at any one time, may have stretched its creative talents just a little too thinly. Success is such a double-edged sword, isn't it?

BRITNEY'S FALL Talking of which, it's just so sad to watch Britney Spears's apparent descent into alcohol-fuelled disintegration. Like Whitney Houston before her, she appears We live in a world that is drowning in thousands of manmade chemicals and industrial pollutants. Threats to our health and wellbeing are everywhere in the air we breathe, the food we eat and the products we apply to our bodies. Yet, with billions of pounds and powerful commercial interests at stake, it can be very difficult to raise the alarm. Every time any worrying new evidence emerges of the potential dangers of our chemically drenched lifestyle, industry-funded lobby groups leap in with soothing words, reassuring us there's no cause for concern and dismissing the research as scaremongering.

So why is it that cancer rates are spiralling, for instance, or sperm counts dropping so alarmingly, or the incidence of childhood asthma going through the roof?

Take the latest so-called 'health scare' the possible link between mass-market antiperspirants and breast cancer. Dr Phillippa Darbre, cancer researcher at Reading University, has found chemicals called parabens, used as preservatives antiperspirants and deodorants, cancerous breast tumours.

She's also warned that compounds of aluminium and zirconium in these products could increase the risk of cancer by raising hormone levels.

In response to this, manufacturers involved in the Pounds 400 million-ayear antiperspirant and deodorant industry assure us that their products are entirely safe.

It's a familiar process of media claim and counterclaim that leaves people feeling dazed, confused and angry. What is safe and what isn't? What should we do?

Who should we believe?

In my view, there's a simple answer. We have to realise there's always a price to pay whenever we eat or apply something to our bodies that isn't natural. In today's world, to have pressed the self-destruct button. Why do so many megasuccessful young performers fall apart? Why bother to get that rich and famous if you're just going to end up a dishevelled public spectacle? It doesn't have to happen. Look at Kylie Minogue and how together and level-headed she's managed to remain, despite early stardom.

To survive, it's obviously essential to have a really strong sense of self.

Without it, it's impossible to balance out the highs and the lows and stay grounded. I just wish there was some sort of training course for young superstars on how to enjoy success, fame and wealth and not self-destruct, but I suppose that's a little fanciful.

We've seen it happen too often already, and are doomed to keep seeing it.

MEDICAL CHARLATANS This week I listened to Radio 4's Fergal Keane interview one of the hundreds of women literally mutilated by the disgraced gynaecologist Richard Neale. Struck off the medical register in Canada for gross professional misconduct in the early Eighties, Neale moved over here and began working in a series of senior hospital positions.

Despite leaving what Keane described as a 'trail of medical mayhem' in his wake, it took the authorities here an unbelievable 18 years to act against him. With the crimes of the mass murderer Dr Harold Shipman also in the news, I couldn't help but wonder why many in the medical profession continue to feel so superior to complementary medicine practitioners such as homeopaths, acupuncturists and herbalists. One recent newspaper report said regulation of alternative health professionals was urgently needed 'to help root out charlatans and boost public confidence'.

Really? When did we last hear of anyone killed or mutilated by a rogue herbalist? Neale and Shipman were supposedly highly 'regulated', yet they caused more pain and suffering than any unregulated acupuncturist or homeopath ever did.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

