TITLE	Obesity raises risk of cancer

By JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Last updated at 16:27 06 April 2004

Obesity will soon cause more cancers than smoking as weight becomes the chief lifestyle factor in triggering the disease, experts warned yesterday.

Millions are putting their health at risk because they are unaware that poor diet and lack of activity can increase their chance of developing cancer, said Cancer Research UK.

Just three in every 100 Britons recognise that obesity pushes up the risk, according to a survey carried out for the charity. But 70 per cent knew of the link between obesity and heart disease.

The cancers most affected by bodyweight are breast, womb, kidney, bowel and oesophagus.

Around a third of cancers of the womb are thought to be triggered by body fat, while the figure for colon and breast cancers is around a tenth.

Keeping to a healthy weight could save an estimated 6,800 women a year from the disease, 5 per cent of the total number of cases.

For men, the figure is 4,000 cases, or 3 per cent

Soaring obesity rates

Professor Jane Wardle, director of Cancer Research UK's health behaviour unit, said recent studies confirmed a link between obesity and most cancers.

'Obesity is probably as big a risk as smoking when it comes to cancer and obesity rates are climbing, whereas thankfully smoking rates are declining,' she said.

'Excess body fat is not harmless extra padding but metabolically active tissue producing hormones that can increase the risk of cancer.'

Lack of exercise

In England, 47 per cent of men and 33 per cent of women are overweight, with around a fifth being obese.

The Government recommends at least 30 minutes' moderately intense activity on five or more days a week.

But only one in three men and one in four women meets these guidelines.

The NOP poll of 1,000 people was revealed as CRUK launched its 5 kilometre women-only Race For Life, which aims to raise &pound;20million.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

