TITLE	Swinging Sixties leave cancer legacy

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

The Swinging Sixties and the sexual liberation that resulted from the Pill has led to an explosion in the risk of cervical cancer among young women, say doctors.

They claim the success of the national screening programme in detecting early cases of pre-cancer has masked the enormous increase in risk over the last 30 years.

Rates of full-blown cancer have halved during this time. But without screening they would have more than doubled.

A report highlights for the first time the growing risk of cancer of the cervix which is linked to sexual activity and transmission of a common virus, the human papilloma virus (HPV), which can be carried by both sexes.

It says the NHS screening programme - introduced in some areas in 1967 but officially launched in 1988 - has prevented eight out of ten cancers.

Screening offers smear tests for women between 20 and 64 at least once every five years.

They can detect pre-cancerous cells which can be treated before they become dangerous, although in up to 4,000 cases a year full-blown cancer is diagnosed.

The death rate has been falling, but the disease still claims about 1,300 lives a year.

The study by Dr Amanda Herbert, a consultant cytopathologist at St Thomas' Hospital, London, shows cervical cancer is now rare in Britain only because most women are screened regularly.

Her report - published in the medical journal Cytopathology - found there was a substantially-increased risk among women born since 1940 which was averted by screening and early treatment.

Dr Herbert said: 'The risk to a woman aged 50 now of developing cervical cancer would have more than doubled compared with the risk faced by a woman of 50 in 1970 without screening.'

The study showed cervical cancer cases among women in their early 30s in 1981 had more than doubled in ten years while those of pre-cancer had more than trebled.

It said: 'The increased risk in women born since 1940 was thought to be related to the greater sexual freedom allowed by the Pill.'

Dr Herbert said there was an increase in risk among sexually active women during both world wars.

'The risk of cervical cancer in those growing up since the Swinging Sixties was rather greater - but it probably did not take off until the 1970s,' she added.

Dr Herbert said both sexes could carry HPV and the more sexual partners a man had, the greater the risk to the women in his life.

She said: 'A lot of men and women carry the virus and the risk of catching it rises if you have more than sexual partner.

'But having just one partner can lead to you getting it and studies show married women whose husbands have slept with someone else are more at risk.'

Dr Herbert stressed most people who become infected with HPV can shake it off because their immune system fights back or they have an easily treatable pre-cancer.

'Only one to two per cent of cases cause significant problems,' she added.

Dr Anne Szarewski, of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, also agreed that screening had probably stopped an epidemic of cervical cancer in young women.

She said: 'It is imperative that they are encouraged to go for regular screening in order to prevent a dramatic increase in cervical cancer over the next 30 years.'

She said research by the ICRF showed the NHS cervical screening programme led to 6,000 fewer deaths from cervical cancer between 1991 and 1997 and by 2025 could prevent 5,000 cancers a year.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

