TITLE	Wonder fruit and veg we can't live without

by ANDREA PERRY, femail.co.uk

Eating more cabbage, garlic and watercress could really help save your life.

Research has shown that some 'wonder vegetables' contain excellent properties for reducing the risk of heart disease and cancers.

While the reason is as yet unclear, it's believed to be related to the combined cocktail effect of high levels of fibre, vitamins, minerals, important antioxidant nutrients and other plant chemicals such as flavonols which help to stop arteries clogging up and causing heart disease.

Dr Mary Berrington, of The Cancer Research Campaign, says 'There's now a lot of evidence that diet can influence our risk of cancer.

'High fruit and veg consumption is associated with a decreased risk of several types of cancer, particularly stomach and bowel cancer.

'Fruits and vegetables contain carotenoids, flavonoids and other compounds that may be important in reducing the risk of cancer. Not all fruit and vegetables contain the same mix of these compounds, so variety is probably the key. 'Eating a wide range of fruit and veg increases the likelihood of getting beneficial components from all of them.'

Green vegetables also contain folic acid, which reduces the blood level of a substance called homocysteine, which may be a risk factor for heart disease.

A spokeswoman for the British Heart Foundation says 'Fruit and vegetables contain high levels of antioxidant vitamins such as A, C and E and these are beneficial to the heart.

'Eating at least five portions of fruit or vegetables each day is an excellent way to reduce the risk of coronary heart disease, by helping to prevent hardening of the arteries.'

The top six wonder vegetables

Garlic: contains the amino acid, allicin which scientists say has antibiotic and bactericidal effects.

Though Garlic has become popular for its flavour its medicinal properties have been known about for centuries. In the Middle Ages garlic was used to treat leprosy and in the trenches of World War I, garlic juice was also used to treat infected wounds.

Garlic lowers the risk of heart disease and strokes through its effect on blood-clotting mechanisms. An American study found that people who eat raw or cooked garlic regularly face only half the risk of stomach cancer and two-thirds the risk of colon cancer.

Garlic has always been known as an aphrodisiac and its properties in improving blood circulation are beneficial in helping men with impotency problems. It is also good for zapping bacteria, and warding off coughs and colds.

Cabbage: is the oldest and most widely grown vegetable of the Brassica group, belonging to the mustard family. The other members of this group include: broccoli, brussel sprouts, cauliflower, Chinese cabbage, kale, kohlrabi, and turnips.

The green leaves of a cabbage are much more nutritious than the white ones. They contain higher amounts of vitamin E and are up to 50 times richer in carotenoids, these are both important antioxidants that can protect your system against disease.

Regularly eating more than one portion of cabbage a week is thought to offer significant protection against colon cancer and possibly stomach cancer.

It can also be used to relive pain from engorged breasts. Simply wash and clean raw cabbage leaves and place it under your bra, but if you are breast feeding you should ensure that you drink plenty of fluids as it could effect your milk supply.

Watercress: is a good source of chlorophyll, which may protect you against the DNA damage that can lead to cancer. It also has high levels of iron and beta-carotene. Only 40gs of watercress supplies almost 10 per cent of the daily calcium requirement, 40 per cent of RDA of vitamin C, plus iron and folic acid.

The leafy vegetable is packed full of other ingredients which have a beneficial effect on health. Recent research by scientists at the Institute for Food Research in Norwich found that watercress triggers a protective reaction to cancer when it is eaten.

The group of compounds found in relatively low levels in watercress help switch on protective enzymes in our bodies.

Onions: particularly red ones, contain high levels of a flavonoid, quercetin, which has a natural antihistamine effect. Histamine is the irritant that causes heat rashes, hay fever and adverse reactions to bites and stings, so eating onions daily may help prevent these summer problems.

Onions also contain carbohydrate, potassium, calcium, vitamin C and fibre. They have many medicinal properties and have been used to lower blood sugar, stimulate the heart, eliminate fat and stimulate the production of urine as well as combating colds and viral infections.

Carrots: contain two types of carotene which may help prevent ultraviolet light damaging the lens of the eye, thus reducing the risk of cataracts. Studies show that people who eat carrots regularly also have a reduced risk of cancers of the lungs, stomach and bladder.

Beta-carotene is the compound which gives carrots their orange colour. Researchers from the Institute for Food Research found that feeding beta-carotene to healthy male volunteers was beneficial to the immune system.

Citrus fruits: can combat illnesses such as heart disease and cancer. The common citrus fruits such as lemons, oranges, limes and grapefruits contain essential vitamins such as A (beta-carotene) and C and minerals including potassium and calcium, as well as providing dietary fibre.

Vitamins A and C are key antioxidant vitamins which combat the harmful effects of free radicals, the unstable molecules that can cause the cellular damage that is believed to be a precursor to heart disease and cancer.

 Lemons contain vitamin C, limes contain vitamin C and traces of vitamin A and calcium and oranges contain vitamins A and C and potassium, which is an important nutrient for a healthy heart.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

