TITLE	Attacking breast cancer naturally

by DR JOHN BRIFFA, Daily Mail

Scientists have recently revealed that they have finally unravelled the human genome. One surprising fact that has emerged is that we appear to contain far fewer genes than was previously thought - only twice as many as a fruit fly.

This discovery adds more weight to the idea that, as far as our health is concerned, nurture may be more important than nature in the long term.

This seems to be particularly true for breast cancer, the incidence of which has doubled over the past 30 years.

Such a rapid increase in breast cancer rates can be explained only by changes in our lifestyle and environment.

Research has demonstrated that using dietary measure alone, risk of breast cancer can by cut by as much as half.

And up to 80 per cent of cases are believed to be preventable using a package of lifestyle modifications.

The majority of breast cancers are related to the hormone oestrogen, which stimulates the breast cells to divide more rapidly, increasing the risk of the uncontrolled cell growth characteristic of cancer.

The more oestrogen a woman is exposed to, the greater her risk of breast cancer. Oestrogen is produced in significant quantities during the monthly cycle, and this may help to explain why women who start their periods early, or have a late menopause, are at increased risk.

Pregnancy tends to protect against breast cancer, probably by reducing a woman's lifetime exposure to oestrogen.

Breastfeeding also helps, and woman who have breastfed for at least two years in total enjoy a 20 per cent to 30 per cent reduction in risk.

The link between oestrogen and breast cancer is perhaps most relevant for women who exhibit symptoms of excess oestrogen - a condition which many natural practitioners refer to as 'oestrogen dominance.'

The most common feature of oestrogen dominance is pre-menstrual syndrome, particularly if this is associated with symptoms such as breast tenderness and fluid retention.

The herb Agnus castus is known to help PMS by correcting hormonal imbalance. Although no studies have looked at this association specifically, it is possible that using Agnus Castus to regulate PMS may reduce breast cancer in women exhibiting symptoms of oestrogen dominance.

Because most forms of the oral contraceptive pill and hormone replacement therapy are based on synthetic forms of oestrogen, it is not surprising that these drugs are associated with an increase in breast cancer risk.

Studies show that women who take the Pill are up to twice as likely to develop breast cancer, depending on length of use.

Other research suggests that women who take HRT for five years or more have a 35 per cent increase in risk. Diet offers women a variety of preventative strategies.

There is evidence linking a diet high in fruit and vegetables with a reduced risk of breast cancer.

Fruits and vegetables tend to be high in antioxidant nutrients such as betcarotene and vitamin C, and these help to combat damaging molecules called free radicals, which are heavily implicated in the processes that cause cancer.

Lycopene, a potent antioxidant found in tomatoes, also seems to have a protective effect. It may also help to supplement with a good antioxidant complex containing at least 15,000iu of betacarotene and 5mg of lycopene.

Cruciferous vegetables, such as broccoli, cabbage and cauliflower, contain a phytochemical known as indole-3-carbinol which has been shown to inhibit breast cancer cells in the laboratory.

There is also evidence that certain pulses, seeds and foods based on soya help reduce breast cancer risk. Populations who eat an abundance of such foods have been shown to enjoy significantly reduced rates of the disease.

The health benefits of soya &iquest; soya beans, soya milk and tofu, for example &iquest; and foods such as lentils and chickpeas have been ascribed to substances called isoflavones and lignans that have weak oestrogen-like effects in the body.

Isolfavones and lignans have been shown to block the action of the more powerful. Oestrogen made naturally in the body, and it is this, in part, which explains their cancer-protective effect.

It may also help to take fish oils in supplement form: 1g of fish oil should be taken 1-3 times a day.

Our food and drink can also be contaminated with chemicals which have cancer-promoting and/or oestrogen-like effects.

Women with breast cancer are more likely to have higher levels of such chemicals in their bodies, and this is a good argument for putting more emphasis on organic foods in the diet.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

