TITLE	Danger in the house

by BEEZY MARSH, Daily Mail

Mysteriously high levels of radiation in the home could be putting an estimated 44,000 children in Britain at increased risk of leukaemia, experts admitted.

Scientists confess they have no idea of the source but say it could be electricity supply cables, wiring and even household appliances such as electric shavers and hairdryers.

The revelation that an estimated 100,000 homes have high levels of electromagnetic radiation came in a report which confirmed that children living near high voltage power lines do face a slightly increased risk of leukaemia.

In a report to the Government's radiation watchdog, a group of health and scientific experts said pylons may cause one case every two years.

But they said radiation levels in the home pose a greater risk and could be causing at least one extra case of the cancer a year.

And 80 per cent of homes with strong electromagnetic fields (EMF) are not close to pylons. The risk is thought to kick in at levels higher than 0.4 micro-tesla of radiation.

Can openers, microwaves, dishwashers, hair dryers, video recorders and food processors all emit well in excess of this - but there is no proven link.

Stuart Allen, of the advisory group which reports to the Government's National Radiological Protection Board, admitted further studies were needed to try to pinpoint the source.

'I would hazard a guess it is distribution - the way the electricity is brought in to homes,' he said. 'Electrical devices also cause EMF but the level of exposure depends on length and frequency of use.'

The risk of suffering leukaemia before the age of 15 is one in 1,400 in the general population, but one in 700 among those living in homes with high EMF, said the report.

The group, led by epidemiologist Sir Richard Doll - who discovered the link between smoking and lung cancer in the 60s - said the biological mechanisms by which EMF could cause cancer have not been proven.

But they said: 'Unless further research indicates that the finding is due to chance or some unrecognised artefact, the possibility remains that intense and prolonged exposures to magnetic fields can increase the risk of leukaemia in children.'

Professor Doll, who claimed he would be happy to live next to a power line, said: 'The results of nine studies we looked at showed an increased risk of childhood leukaemia but only in very high doses.

'There are few people with an average exposure that high. Our estimate is about five in 1,000 children may have such exposure in this country.

'The results suggest that if there is a risk, that amount of radiation would double the risk of childhood leukaemia among those children. But it's difficult to accept there is a causal relationship.'

Some experts claim the slightly higher risk may be linked to power lines or electrical equipment emitting charged particles - or ions - which react with oxygen and nitrogen in the air and stick to airborne pollutants which are breathed in.

The electric charge may let pollutants enter human cells more easily. Families convinced their relatives died of cancer because they lived near pylons welcomed the report which could now trigger compensation claims totalling millions.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

