TITLE	Eating less could cut breast cancer risk

by BEEZY MARSH, Daily Mail

Eating less and taking more exercise could help lower a woman's chances of developing breast cancer, it emerged.

Scientists have pinpointed an important link between the disease and nutrition, which may explain why women in poorer countries have lower rates of breast cancer.

The amount of food a woman eats can affect concentrations in her body of hormones which are now 'strongly linked' to an increased risk of breast cancer, according to a study in the British Medical Journal.

The hormones oestrogen and progesterone are produced by the ovaries every month and govern a woman's menstrual cycle.

Researchers found that the more a woman eats, or if she leads a sedentary lifestyle, the higher are the concentrations of progesterone. Higher calorie intake was also linked to increased progesterone, mainly because low energy intakes can impair the function of the ovaries.

Women from less affluent nations tend to eat less food and lead lifestyles which involve more daily movement. They not only have lower progesterone, but less breast cancer.

Researchers from the University of Krakow in Poland analysed hormone levels in saliva samples from women in poorer countries - Bolivia, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Nepal and Poland - and compared them with samples from the U.S.

No reliable samples were available for the UK, where more than 30,000 women are diagnosed with breast cancer each year and 13,000 die from the disease.

The study found higher concentrations of progesterone at certain points in the menstrual cycle were associated with increased rates of breast cancer. A 70 per cent or more increase in the hormone translated into an eightfold rise in the rate of the disease.

Women in the Congo had the lowest progesterone levels and the Americans the highest. Breast cancer rates in the U.S. are 87 cases per 100,000 women, while those in the Congo are as low as ten. In Britain, the rate is 124 cases per 100,000.

Report author Professor Grazyna Jasieriska said: 'Although evidence of a link between ovarian function and breast cancer risk is based on the study of a limited number of populations, the strength of the relation strongly suggests that it is an important biological phenomenon.

'Since ovarian function responds to nutritional status, the risk of breast cancer may be modified if changes are made in a woman's lifestyle. An increase in physical activity and decrease in calorie intake may thus lead to a reduction in breast cancer risk.'

Jackie Graveney, director of communications at Breakthrough Breast Cancer, said: 'The report shows an interesting correlation but also highlights the need for large and high-powered clinical trials.'

But Dr Tim Key, an expert on lifestyle factors at the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, warned: 'The strength of the association may not be as great as the authors suggest because other factors probably explain some of the low breast cancer risk in poor countries.

'But there is already reasonably good evidence that even moderate levels of physical activity can reduce breast cancer risk.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

