TITLE	Atkins recommended for obese children

Obese children should be put on Atkins-style diets to lose weight and prevent life-threatening diseases, according to a cancer specialist.

Professor Julian Peto believes high protein, low carbohydrate diets could solve the UK's soaring obesity problem.

Some doctors are already putting overweight children on Atkins-style diets, despite concerns that they may cause serious health problems.

Professor Peto, from the Institute of Cancer Research, said: "We have a major obesity problem in this country. It is now overtaking smoking as the number one killer.

"Children especially need to be targeted. We should be weighing children in school regularly and we need to re-think dietary advice."

He said the Atkins diet, which involves eating lots of meat and other high protein foods, works because proteins suppress the appetite.

"I am sure the Atkins wasn't developed on this basis, but that is why it works," he told BBC Radio 5 Live.

"The levels of salt and fat are anything but healthy but the basis of the diet - low carbohydrate and high protein - is ideal for losing weight."

Obesity doubled

In 1998, 9 per cent of two to four-year-olds were considered obese - almost double the figure of 1989.

Opponents of the Atkins diet claim that, in the long term, it can cause kidney damage, thin bones and constipation, raise cholesterol levels and increase the risk of diabetes and an early heart attack.

But Dr Dee Dawson, medical director at North London's Rhodes Farm Clinic, which treats children with eating disorders, said the diet is good for youngsters.

"The children who come here are not just overweight, they are ill, and in danger of dying," said Dr Dawson.

"Some can't breathe and some can't lie down. I think the basis of Atkins is a good diet for children whose priority is to get weight off."

Some nutritionists have warned that not enough is yet known about the diet's long-term effects. Dr Toni Steer, of the Medical Research Council, said: "I would be very concerned about advising children to follow diets like Atkins."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

