TITLE	HRT: who can you believe?

by BEEZY MARSH, Daily Mail

Hundreds of thousands of British women may have abandoned HRT needlessly, it emerged yesterday.

More than half the 1.7million users in this country stopped taking it last year after research here linked the treatment to breast cancer.

But an American study yesterday contradicted those findings and said hormone replacement therapy may still be the best treatment for many menopausal women.

Experts condemned the confusion and said Government health officials had jumped the gun by warning women off HRT.

One said it effectively turns the clock back to the 1960s, when middle-aged women were expected to get through the "change of life" as best they could.

HRT works by replacing hormones lost at the time of the menopause. It can be taken as a pill, patch or a nasal spray.

Doctors were last year banned by the Government's Committee on Safety of Medicines from prescribing it as a treatment for the "brittle bone" disease osteoporosis and can give it to women only in the 'short term'.

Over the past two years, studies have raised fears that HRT is responsible for breast cancer, strokes and heart disease. One warned that the risks of taking it outweighed the benefits - sparking panic among the 1.7million British users. But U.S. research now provides compelling evidence that oestrogen-only HRT does not cause an increase in breast cancer risk - for many women the most worrying side-effect.

The findings of the sevenyear Women's Health Initiative study, published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, contradict the earlier UK research.

The British study suggested oestrogen- only HRT increased the risk of breast cancer by 25 per cent if taken for ten years.

Oestrogen-only HRT - suitable for women who have had a hysterectomy - is taken by one in four UK users.

The UK study also claimed a more common form of HRT, combining oestrogen and progestogen, doubled the chances of getting breast cancer if taken for ten years.

But the U.S. study of 11,000 women found fewer cases of breast cancer in those on oestrogen- only HRT than those taking a dummy pill.

There was also a 39 per cent cut in the risk of hip fractures, and no significant effect on heart disease, colon cancer or pulmonary embolisms.

Menopause specialists now fear women have been robbed of a drug which could protect them from osteoporosis and ease distressing symptoms.

Women face confusion over which HRT - if any - is safe and Government medical authorities have failed to respond promptly to the developments, it is claimed.

Karen Winterhalter, executive director of the independent charity Women's Health Concern, which helps women cope with the menopause, said yesterday: "In no other health area have patients been given such conflicting advice over what treatment they should use.

"Women have been cast adrift. The clock has been turned back 40 years to a time before HRT, and the effects on women and their relationships can be devastating.

"As well as a greater risk of osteoporosis, they are suffering night sweats, mood swings and sex becomes too painful to bear. These are things people don't want to talk about, but it is happening."

A total of 850,000 women - around half of British users - are thought to have given up HRT because of health scares.

Many have instead tried herbal remedies, including black cohosh and evening primrose oil. Mrs Winterhalter said these could cost up to &pound;50 a month. Hardest hit are those just approaching the menopause, who are living in fear of symptoms but are terrified HRT will cost them their health - or even their lives.

Some women have been refused HRT, while others are allowed it by GPs only if they sign disclaimers, it is claimed.

Consultant hormone specialist Dr Peter Selby, of Manchester Royal Infirmary, said: "I think people have been too concerned with the sideeffects of HRT and not about the benefits.

'We have got to get this in perspective.

"Based on these latest findings, oestrogen-only HRT is a pretty safe product.

"If women are at risk of osteoporosis and if they are having menopausal symptoms, then they should be considered for the therapy."

He said doctors would in effect have to contradict the advice of the Government's Committee on Safety of Medicines to prescribe it as a firstchoice treatment to prevent osteoporosis.

One in three women over 50 suffers osteoporosis. Around 14,000 people die every year in Britain through osteoporotic bone fracture and many suffer pain and disability.

Specialists yesterday called on the CSM to issue new guidance on HRT safety.

Dr John Stevenson, chairman of Women's Health Concern and a member of the British Menopause Society council, said: "My feeling is the CSM has jumped the gun on HRT."

The U.S. study of oestrogenonly HRT showed there was a 39 per cent increased risk for stroke.

But Dr Stevenson said this would be lower for British women on HRT because they tended to be younger than those in the U.S. study. Osteoporosis expert Professor David Purdie, who resigned from the CSM in December because he disagreed with its ruling on HRT, said he expects the committee to reconsider its advice in the light of the U.S. study.

"Women who have had a hysterectomy can take oestrogen- only HRT with reasonable confidence that their risk of breast cancer will be unchanged," he added.

This would mean women would have a one in nine lifetime chance of developing breast cancer.

Professor Purdie said further studies may yet point to a lower risk of breast cancer with the combined form of HRT than that which is feared.

The Department of Health said the CSM is considering the latest study and will update advice to women and doctors if necessary.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Are you looking forward to the Wonder Woman TV series?

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

