TITLE	Want to beat cancer? Eat your greens

Last updated at 14:20 10 May 2004

Experts have today recommended two to three portions of green vegetables a week - including Brussel sprouts and cabbage - after new research was published boosting their role in cancer prevention.

The recommendation was made after scientists at the Institute of Food Research published a study showing plant chemicals created during the preparation of some of the vegetables could kill colon cancer cells in a similar way to some anti-cancer drugs.

The study showed that the plant chemical allyl-isothiocyanate, (AITC), a breakdown product of sinigrin, a chemical compound found in some types of vegetables, appeared to selectively target colon tumour cells in laboratory work.

The chemical is created when some cruciferous vegetables - including the brassica family - such as mustard, cabbage, horseradish, cauliflower, sprouts, swede, kale, and wasabi are chopped, chewed, cooked, processed and digested.

Professor Ian Johnson, head of the IFR team, said he recommended two to three portions of brassicas - including broccoli and cabbage - should be eaten a week to boost cancer prevention.

Preventative effect

The shorter the cooking time and the less water used to prepare the vegetables, the greater the preventive effect, he said.

He stressed that the research findings boosted the knowledge about the cancer prevention mechanism of the vegetables, rather than a cure.

"We are not talking about a therapy or a cure, we are talking about prevention," he said.

He added: "This is not a miracle cancer cure, but it does show that preventive dietary measures can be discovered and exploited in the same way as drugs."

He said the findings would help in giving more precise details on how much of certain vegetables should be eaten, and might also be used in the future to develop vegetables high in cancer prevention factors.

Cancer protective factors

The findings could help boost research into new varieties of vegetables containing particularly high levels of cancer protective factors.

The research was published at the start of Cancer Prevention Week, run by the World Cancer Research Fund, aimed at increasing public awareness of cancer prevention through a healthy diet and lifestyle.

The fund has announced plans for worldwide review of data from more than 10,000 independent studies that have looked at the role of diet, nutrition and physical activity and the links to cancer.

The charity expects to publish its results in the autumn of 2006.

Professor Martin Wiseman, project director and WCRF medical and scientific adviser, said: "The goal is to cut through the widespread confusion about diet's relation to cancer risk by producing a comprehensive report that offers simple, science-based recommendations for individuals and policy makers."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

