TITLE	Parents ignoring sun cancer warnings

Last updated at 11:56 10 May 2004

Parents are ignoring cancer warnings over keeping children safe in the sun, campaigners said today.

More than a third of the parents questioned by Cancer Research UK admitted that their child had suffered sunburn, despite the majority knowing that this can cause skin cancer.

The charity is launching a poster with the caption Kids Cook Quick to drive home the message that youngsters should be protected against the sun's harmful UV rays.

The poster, being launched for Sun Awareness Week, features two sunburnt children sitting on a beach and is being sent to 19,000 nurseries and every GP surgery in the country, as well as being displayed in Boots pharmacies.

Poster campaign

Sara Hiom, co-ordinator of Cancer Research UK's SunSmart campaign, said: "This poster has been created to help remind parents to protect their children.

"Our survey shows that just over three-quarters of parents know that it's never OK for a child to go red in the sun, but they may not always realise that young skin can burn very quickly, in as little as 10 minutes.

"Sometimes, even with the best intentions, we can be caught out."

The SunSmart campaign says that youngsters and adults should avoid the sun in the middle of the day, cover up with hat, T-shirt and sunglasses and use sunscreen of factor 15 or higher.

The survey of more than 200 parents found that 41 per cent liked to see their children with a tan, with most believing it made them look more healthy.

Skin cancer cases increasing

Research has shown that sunburn in children can double their risk of getting skin cancer later in life.

Cases of skin cancer have more than doubled in the past decade.

Around 7,000 new cases of malignant melanoma - the most serious form of the disease - are diagnosed each year in the UK, with around 1,600 deaths.

Malignant melanoma is the third most common cancer among those aged 15 to 24.

The British Skin Foundation (BSF) today also warned sports fans to take care to protect themselves against the sun at sporting events like Wimbledon this summer.

Dr Colin Holden, a consultant dermatologist, said on the hottest day of summer last year, normal skin burned in just 20 minutes.

Sunburn warnings

"The BSF wants people to enjoy being outside and cheering players on at sporting events, but there is nothing enjoyable about getting sunburnt, and it can cause cancer," he said.

Macmillan Cancer Relief is sending skin cancer nurse specialists out around the country to highlight the importance of sun protection.

The nurses will hold sun awareness days in shopping centres and "Mole Watch" clinics in shops and hospitals where the public can have their moles checked for signs of damage.

Nurse Specialist Karen Curtis said: "Skin cancer is a growing problem and we want people to take care.

"In the last 10 years skin cancer has risen faster than any other cancer in the UK."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

