TITLE	The anti prostate cancer diet

Our easy, seven-day meal plan will help you to combat prostate disease

MONDAY

BREAKFAST: Wholewheat fortified cereal (e.g. All Bran Plus or Bran Flakes) with soya milk. Top with scooped flesh from half a small cantaloupe melon.

How it helps: Wholegrains and soya contain hormone-modulating substances that could help cut prostate cancer risk. Orange-fleshed fruit and vegetables such as cantaloupe melon contain beta carotene, a dietary antioxidant that is also protective.

LUNCH: Half a carton of fresh vegetable soup (red pepper, sweet potato, pumpkin or carrot), whole grain bread roll. Orange.

How it helps: Vegetable consumption is linked to reduced prostate cancer ri sk. Brightly coloured sources generally contain more of the valuable antioxidants, vital to fight disease in the prostate.

DINNER: Spaghetti bolognaise made with very lean mince and oodles of tomato puree. Serve with whole wheat spaghetti and broccoli or cabbage. Dessert: Sorbet.

HOW IT HELPS: Bolognaise sauce is another source of processed tomatoes rich in protective lycopene which keeps the prostate 'clean' of germs. Very lean beef contains only a little saturated fat, so it is fine if eaten occasionally.

TUESDAY

BREAKFAST: Muesli sprinkled with handful of ground-up linseeds. Skimmed organic milk or soya milk. Glass of freshly squeezed orange juice.

HOW IT HELPS: Linseeds are a rich source of essential fatty acids and lignans, both thought to protect prostate health.

LUNCH: Vegetable pizza (eat it with a side salad of leafy greens). Banana.

HOW IT HELPS: Pizzas (piled with vegetables not pepperoni) are a great way to get more of the processed tomato products that cut prostate cancer risk by up to 30 pc.

DINNER: Vegetable lasagne served with whole grain bread and a side salad of leafy greens. Dessert: Pecan pie.

HOW IT HELPS: More protective vegetables. Nuts in pecan pie are full of zinc and fatty acids. Occasional pastry puddings are fine as long as there is only one layer of pastry to cut down on saturated fat.

WEDNESDAY

BREAKFAST: Grill rashers of very lean bacon, poach a free-range egg, and serve with grilled mushrooms and tomatoes and lots of tomato ketchup.

HOW IT HELPS: If you stick to lean bacon and shun fatty sausages it's possible to have a cooked breakfast that isn't too high in harmful saturated fat. Adding ketchup supplies the carotenoid lycopene - linked in a few studies to reduced incidence of prostate cancer.

LUNCH: Pot of ready-made kidney bean and chick pea salad. Wholefood flapjack containing no more than 10g fat. Two clementines.

HOW IT HELPS: Beans supply yet more of the hormone-regulating plant compounds that could reduce prostate cancer. Flapjack is full of oats which provide zinc and iron.

DINNER: Tomato soup, tinned or fresh. Grilled oily fish (choose from salmon, trout, herrings or mackerel) with boiled or baked potatoes, peas and sweetcorn. Dessert: Any fresh fruit.

HOW IT HELPS: Tomato soup is packed with lycopene which reduces risk of prostate cancer. Oily fish is a rich source of the omega-3 fats. Eating fish in place of sausages and meat pies helps cut saturates which can increase prostate cancer risk.

THURSDAY

BREAKFAST: Whole grain toast with thin spreading of butter and honey or marmalade. Half a large can of ruby grapefruit segments.

HOW IT HELPS: Supplies more healthy whole grains and antioxidants believed to cut cancer risk overall (red grapefruit is another source of lycopene).

LUNCH: Baked potato with vegetable chilli topping. Apple.

HOW IT HELPS: Packs in more protective vegetables, plus extra fibre.

DINNER: Curry ready meal ?opt for one vegetable dish and and one chicken or prawn dish and serve with rice or naan bread and half a can of chickpea dahl. Choose dishes with drier, preferably tomato-based sauces rather than those containing cream. Dessert: Fresh or tinned pineapple.

HOW IT HELPS: Ready meals and curries aren't out of bounds if you make the right choices. Vegetable and tomato-based curries are another opportunity to eat more valuable antioxidants.

FRIDAY

BREAKFAST: Porridge with banana and seeds. Make porridge using 1oz (25g) of oats, half a pint of water and quarter of a pint of soya milk. Chop one banana into the made up orridge and sprinkle over a handful of ground sunflower and pumpkin seeds.

HOW IT HELPS: Pumpkin seeds are a rich source of ssential fatty acids and zinc, both crucial prostate nutrients. Sunflower seeds supply vitamin E ? another protective antioxidant. Porridge is also full of zinc.

LUNCH: Baked beans on whole grain toast. Serve with half a chopped avocado. Small bunch of red grapes.

HOW IT HELPS: The tomato sauce in baked beans supplies more lycopene, plus vitamin E and healthy fats from the vocado.

DINNER: Grilled white fish with oven chips. Top fish with lots of tomato salsa and serve with spinach and another vegetable. Dessert: Frozen yoghurt.

HOW IT HELPS: Oven chips are a healthy low-fat alternative to the chip shop or deep-fried variety and combined with ingredients such as spinach, tomato salsa and white fish make a healthy low-fat (and therefore cancer-protective) meal.

SATURDAY

BREAKFAST: Corn flakes with skimmed or soya milk. Sprinkle with a tablespoon of wheatgerm and a handful of sultanas.

HOW IT HELPS: Sprinkling wheatgerm on cereal is another way to boost intake of protective vitamin E.

LUNCH: Carrot and hummus sandwich. Small bag of unsalted nuts. Mango.

HOW IT HELPS: Hummus (made from chick peas) contains more of the plant hormones that may help block the cancer-promoting action of testosterone.

DINNER: Lamb and tofu kebabs. Alternate pieces of cubed lamb, marinated tofu and red pepper on to kebabs sticks. Grill until cooked through and serve with couscous and red onions sauteed in a little olive oil. Dessert: Miniature 95pc fat-free Christmas pudding.

HOW IT HELPS: Tofu is another great source of plant hormones that could reduce prostate cancer risk. Christmas pudding is full of essential fatty acids and anti-oxidating dried fruits.

SUNDAY

BREAKFAST: Boiled free-range egg with wholemeal 'soldiers'. Breakfast smoothie made by blending 1 peeled ripe banana with 1*2 pint skimmed or semi-skimmed milk, 1 tsp honey and 1 tbsp wheatgerm.

HOW IT HELPS: Supplies more valuable whole grains and antioxidants. Eggs are often thought to be high in saturated fat, but they actually contain only 1.5g each ? or 5 pc of the maximum daily amount recommended for a man.

LUNCH: Chicken or tuna sandwich with lots of salad and no mayonnaise. Pack of reduced fat crisps. Two kiwi fruit.

HOW IT HELPS: Sticking to sandwich fillings such as chicken and tuna helps keep saturated fat low. The occasional bag of plain crisps (rich in polyunsaturates, not saturates) doesn't do any harm.

DINNER: Mediterranean vegetable steamfry. Chop a selection of vegetables such as carrots, broccoli, cauliflower and mange tout, and saute in a dab of olive oil for 5 minutes. Then add 1 level tablespoon of fresh mixed herbs, 2oz (50g) black olives and some pasta sauce to taste. Put the lid back on the pan and steam for 5 minutes. Dessert: Blackberry and apple crumble with skimmed organic milk custard.

HOW IT HELPS: Another great source of the brightly coloured fruits and vegetables that contain minerals, lycopene and beta-carotene which improves mmunity.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

