TITLE	How healthy is your cup of coffee?

Many of us rely on a cup of coffee to galvanise us into action in the mornings - but there could be health drawbacks, depending on what type you drink. One estimate found there were more carcinogens occurring naturally in a cup of coffee than you'd normally expect to consume from the pesticide residues in food over a whole year. Despite this, coffee has never been found to promote cancer in humans, and in males it may even reduce the risk of colon cancer.

But what is becoming increasingly clear is that coffee brewed in different ways could have varying health effects. Now it is thought that the most risky type is unfiltered ground coffee.

Scientists in the Netherlands recently found that this type contains fatty chemicals known as cafestol and kahweol, which raise levels of dangerous fats in the blood. Other types of coffee may be lower in cardiovascular risk factors but higher in caffeine, which, taken in excess, has its own problems. So which method makes the healthiest coffee brew?

CAFETIERE

Caffeine per cup: Approx 100mg

The unhealthy fatty factors aren't removed by the plunger mechanism, which makes cafetiere coffee one of the riskiest type for raising cholesterol levels. The latest research shows that drinking one litre (four mugs or five cups) of cafetiere coffee daily also increases the blood concentration of a heart attack risk factor known as homocysteine. In healthy individuals, levels rise by about 10 pc within two weeks.

Health rating: **

FILTER

Caffeine per cup: 100-150mg

A fine-paper filter is highly effective at absorbing fatty components, and studies involving high consumption of filter coffee show no negative effects on blood cholesterol. But this type of coffee is generally the highest in caffeine so, if you are particularly sensitive to it, you would probably be better off drinking another type.

Health rating: **** (providing it is made with a paper filter)

ESPRESSO

Caffeine per cup (single shot): Approx 80mg

This is made by forcing hot water at high pressure through the beans. It contains only relatively small concentrations of cafestol and kahweol (the substances that can raise levels of blood cholesterol) and is unlikely to have a significant effect on the heart. The amount of caffeine in a single shot of espresso is less than in cup of standard filter coffee, but if you are regularly drinking double or triple espressos it is easy to overdo it.

Health rating: ***

INSTANT Caffeine per cup: Approx 65mg

Instant coffee is made by brewing coffee beans and then removing the water through freeze-drying. The soluble granules don't contain the fatty substances found in freshly ground coffee, so there is no risk to cardiovascular health. There is also less caffeine in instant coffee. Cup for equal strength cup, it has about half the caffeine content of filter coffee.

Health rating: *****

PERCOLATED

Caffeine per cup: 80-100mg

Electric percolators work by introducing steam-driven spurts of boiling water into a perforated coffee container. The result is an extra high level of oil extraction which can have an adverse effect on the heart.

Health rating:*

TURKISH

Caffeine per cup: Up to 160mg

This boiled coffee is very strong, fully extracted and completely unfiltered, so it has one of the highest concentrations of harmful cafestol and kahweol. Studies suggest that the average rise in blood cholesterol through regularly drinking four to six cups per day is around 10 pc - estimated to correspond to a 20 pc greater risk of heart disease. Health rating: *

CAPPUCCINO

Caffeine per cup: Approx 80mg

A cappuccino is half espresso and half frothy steamed milk. With semi-skimmed milk, each cappuccino has only about 15 calories, but with cream and chocolate flakes, the calorie count can rise.

Health rating: ***

IS DECAFFEINATED HEALTHIER?

A substantial amount of research has turned up very little real evidence that a moderate intake of caffeine presents a serious or even minor threat to a person's health.

But 'moderate' means two to three cups of filter coffee, or the equivalent, a day, and most coffee addicts drink more than that. Four or more cups a day can cause irritability, muscle twitching and insomnia. Also, people who drink this amount will suffer withdrawal symptoms, including headaches, fatigue, depression and poor concentration, if they go without coffee for a day.

Decaffeinated coffee contains just 1mg to 2mg of caffeine per cup, so it makes a big difference if you replace even one or two cups of regular coffee a day.

The main advantage of decaffeinated coffee is that it doesn't inhibit the absorption of vitamins and minerals like the full-caffeine version can.

 There's now evidence that standard coffee drunk with meals can interfere with iron and calcium absorption.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

