TITLE	Soya can reduce chance of womb cancer

Last updated at 10:24 28 May 2004

Eating a diet rich in soya products reduces the risk of women developing womb cancer, researchers have today.

A study of almost 1,700 women in China found that those with a high intake of soya foods, like soya beans and tofu, were less likely to develop endometrial cancer - cancer of the lining of the womb.

The researchers claimed that dietary factors may help explain the differences in cancer rates between different countries around the world.

The study, reported in the British Medical Journal, focused on 832 women from Shanghai who were diagnosed with endometrial cancer between 1997 and 2001, aged 30 to 69.

These were compared with 846 healthy women of the same age group.

Soya food intake

The researchers measured their soya food intake over five years as well as taking their body measurements.

Soya products are a rich source of isoflavones, a major group of phytoestrogens which act like oestrogen in the body.

The oestrogen effects seem to be beneficial in fighting heart disease and cancer, according to past research.

"Women with endometrial cancer had a lower intake of total soya foods and almost every individual soya food investigated, as well as total soya protein and soya isoflavones, than did the controls," the researchers said.

The team, from the Shanghai Cancer Institute, said that soya intake particularly reduced the risk of womb cancer among those women who were overweight.

The researchers noted that rates of endometrial cancer varied by more than 10-fold around the world.

Low incidence of cancer

They said that Asian counties had a low incidence of endometrial cancer and a high consumption of soya food.

In the women studied, the average intake of isoflavones from soya food was about 25 times than reported in Western countries.

The incidence of endometrial cancer in Asian countries was said to be only a fifth to a third of that in the Western world.

The researchers said: "Dietary factors may play an important role in this international variation."

Poor diet

Poor diet, especially one which leads to obesity, has been blamed for increased cases of heart disease and cancer.

As many as 30,000 people are estimated to die prematurely every year from obesity-related conditions in the UK.

The researchers concluded that the more soya women ate, the more their chances of suffering womb cancer were reduced.

"The indication that women with a high body mass index may benefit more from increased soya food intake needs to be verified in future studies," they said.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

