TITLE	Sunbed users 'given bad advice'

Last updated at 09:43 05 June 2004

People who use sunbeds are being given "shockingly bad advice" by health clubs and tanning shops, according to a report published today.

An undercover investigation found staff in outlets failing to carry out safety checks, increasing the risk of users damaging their health and developing skin cancer.

The Consumers Association, which carried out the probe, says the results emphasise the urgent need for tighter regulation of the industry.

Researchers from the watchdog's consumer magazine Health Which? went to 42 tanning outlets across the UK in February this year.

Staff were told a friend wanted to use the sunbed who had red hair and very fair, freckly skin that always burned in the sun - known as type 1 skin. People in this category are among those at highest risk of developing malignant melanoma due to exposure to ultraviolet radiation from the sun and sunbeds.

Sunbed worry

Nevertheless, 40 out of the 42 outlets visited said they would allow a person with type 1 skin on their sunbeds.

Just under half the 40 were members of The Sunbed Association (TSA) whose code of practice states members should turn away people with type 1 skin.

The unnamed outlets which gave the bad advice were six run by local authorities, 20 tanning shops, 13 health and fitness clubs and one beauty salon.

Just two outlets - one local authority operated and a beauty salon - were deemed to offer an "adequate" service although neither correctly advised customers not to have more than 60 sessions on a sunbed in a year.

Dangers

The potential dangers from customers not being warned about using sunbeds was highlighted in a similar investigation by Health Which? five years ago.

Kaye McIntosh, from the magazine, said: "Very little has changed in the intervening five years since Health Which?'s investigation despite the huge increases in the number of people being diagnosed with potentially fatal skin cancer.

"As the industry has clearly shown that it is incapable of regulating itself, the Government must act immediately on the overwhelming advice from national and international medical experts and honour its duty to protect the public from serious health risks associated with the use of sunbeds in the UK."

Sara Hiom, science information manager at Cancer Research UK, said: "Laboratory research has proved that the type of ultraviolet radiation used in sunbeds can cause all types of skin cancer.

"And studies are starting to show that sunbed use is a definite risk factor for malignant melanoma."

"Investigation flawed"

The Sunbed Association branded the Which? investigation "flawed".

In a statement it said: "The style of the mystery shopper research, and the criteria for evaluating and grading the service provided, meant that all of the facilities visited - whether in TSA membership or not - were highly likely if not definite to be given an 'inadequate' grading.

"The explanation for this is that an automatic 'inadequate' grading was awarded to any facility that did not screen out a skin type 1 via a questionnaire."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

