TITLE	Men twice as likely to die of cancer than women

Last updated at 09:48 14 June 2004

Serious inequalities between men and women across a broad range of cancers were highlighted by campaigners today.

The Men's Health Forum (MHF), backed by nine other charities, called for urgent action to tackle differences between the sexes which leave men much more likely to be diagnosed or killed by cancer.

Their report, launched at the start of National Men's Health Week, said that men were almost twice as likely as women to develop one of the 10 most common cancers that affect both sexes.

They were also almost twice as likely to die from one of these 10 cancers.

The MHF said that their analysis showed that current cancer prevention policies and programmes were not working for men.

Their report showed that 134,000 men were diagnosed with cancer every year in the UK, with 80,000 dying of the disease.

Bigger killer than heart disease

They said that cancer was now a bigger killer of men than heart disease - one man in three will be diagnosed with cancer during their lives and one in four will die from the disease.

As well as inequalities between men and women, men from poor social backgrounds were found to be in the worst position of all.

Their chances of dying were double those of men from the highest social classes, the report found.

The MHF said it believed inequalities between the sexes existed because there was no recognition that men think differently from women about their bodies and health, with specific attitudes on behaviours like smoking, alcohol and diet.

The charity wants health professionals to act to develop cancer prevention policies that take men specifically into account.

They support the use of "outreach" services such as health checks for men in workplaces, barbers' shops, pubs and sports venues.

Prevention measures are failing

Peter Baker, director of the MHF, said: "The statistics could not be clearer - men are at far greater risk of developing and dying from cancer than women.

"Present Government policies for the prevention of cancer are failing men and we need to introduce male-specific approaches to tackling the disease."

In efforts to get men to take more of an interest in their health, the MHF has teamed up with the publishers of the Haynes' car manuals to produce a new cancer guide in a way they can relate to.

The guide looks like a car manual but provides information on how men can keep their bodies running like a finely-tuned engine.

Dr Ian Banks, MHF president and author of the manual, said: "Men are used to using information presented in this format.

"The 'body as machine' metaphor resonates with the way many men think about health issues.

"And of course the concept introduces an element of humour - this helps men access health information and advice."

Inequalities

The Royal College of Nursing (RCN) supported calls for action to tackle the health inequalities between men and women across cancers.

Steve Jamieson, RCN men's health adviser, said: "Given the significant numbers of men being diagnosed with cancer, and the high proportion who access care too late to avoid early detection, the RCN agrees that this matter is in need of urgent action by the Government, care and education professions alike.

"Men's needs, in relation to cancer prevention and care, are clearly failing vast numbers of them."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

