TITLE	Could diet save women from breast cancer?

Last updated at 11:35 14 July 2004

Doctors are to investigate whether a woman's diet could improve her chances of surviving breast cancer, it emerged today.

A medical expert from St Andrews University is set to embark on the two-year project, believed to be the first of its kind in the world, to investigate a possible link between certain foods and breast cancer.

Dr Margaret Ritchie will examined whether diet could dictate women's likelihood of developing the disease, the size and aggressiveness of tumours in sufferers and their reaction to cancer treatments.

"We already know that diet influences the incidence of many cancers, but little is known about the effect of diet on the characteristics of cancers which actually develop," she said today.

"Ultimately, this work could improve a woman's survival rate and give her a much better prognosis."

Link to breads

Based in the Bute Medical School, Dr Ritchie has been awarded a Melville Trust Research Fellowship to carry out the work.

She will also try to establish whether exposure to phyto-oestrogens - found in high levels in foods including wholemeal bread, soya yoghurt, raisins and other fruit - has the ability to reduce the risk of breast cancer recurring.

That may lead to phyto-oestrogen supplements being given to women most likely to develop the disease - women with certain gene mutations or those from socially deprived areas.

"Each year, nearly 40,000 people are diagnosed with breast cancer," said Dr Ritchie.

"The results of the study may provide the first insight into whether phyto-oestrogens can prevent breast cancer or influence tumour characteristics and whether phyto-oestrogen supplements could help prevent breast cancer in young women with BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations or those in socially deprived groups."

The study will examine two groups of women - those with breast cancer and those opting for breast reduction who are free from the disease.

Dr Ritchie will use validated food frequency questionnaires, validated biomarkers of phyto-oestrogen intake and a phyto-oestrogen database to collect data and draw conclusions.

The study will also involve the analysis of blood and urine samples, and tumour tissue.

Other risk factors, including the use of oral contraceptives, family history of breast cancer and number of children, will also be taken into account.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

