TITLE	Low-carb diets may beat breast cancer

Last updated at 08:51 08 August 2004

Atkins-style diets may help women to fight breast cancer as well as stay slim, new research suggests.

Scientists have found a link between high consumption of carbohydrates and an increased risk of breast cancer.

The findings suggest that reducing carbohydrate intake, as Atkins dieters do, might lower the risk.

But the American researchers stress that more work is needed to be sure of the implications.

The scientists studied almost 2,000 women in Mexico, where many people eat high carbohydrate diets.

They found that women who obtained 57% or more of their total calories from carbohydrates were more than twice as likely to get breast cancer as those on more balanced diets.

Diet links

Professor Walter Willett, from the Harvard School of Public Health in Boston, who co-led the research, said: "Scientists have long suspected that diet was among the factors contributing to breast cancer.

"Now, with studies like ours, we are beginning gradually to understand what elements of diet specifically are associated with the disease, and to grasp the chemical and biological processes that contribute to it at the cellular level."

Of all the carbohydrate compounds, the sugars sucrose and fructose showed the strongest association with breast cancer risk.

Sucrose, derived from sugar cane, sorghum and sugar beet, is most commonly found in table sugar and sweetened foods and drinks.

Fructose is a component of sucrose and is also found in fruit.

The scientists think the link with breast cancer may be related to elevated levels of insulin and the hormone insulin-like growth factor (IGF).

Eating sweets and starches causes a rapid rise in the body's blood sugar levels, which in turn triggers production of insulin and IGF.

Both substances may influence cancer by helping cells to proliferate, it is believed.

They may also contribute to higher circulating levels of active oestrogens, which are known to stimulate most breast cancers.

The carbohydrate connection remained after the scientists took account of factors such as socio-economic status, age at giving birth for the first time, number of children, and family history.

Dietary fat showed no significant association with breast cancer risk, the scientists wrote in the journal Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and Prevention.

Fibre benefits

Fibre consumption was linked to a lower risk of cancer, possibly because it affected the absorption of carbohydrates.

"This study raises important questions about high carbohydrate diets, particularly among populations or individuals prone to insulin resistance," said Prof Willett.

"However, one study is not enough to make major changes in diet, and more work on this topic is urgently needed."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

