TITLE	Atkins could cut risk of breast cancer

By BETH HALE, Daily Mail

Last updated at 11:06 10 August 2004

An Atkins-style diet may help women keep breast cancer at bay as well as stay slim.

A study has found that women with a high consumption of carbohydrates had an increased risk of the disease.

Scientists discovered that those who ate a lot of carbohydrates were more than twice as likely to get breast cancer as those who ate less sugar and starch.

The research is good news for women on the Atkins diet, which excludes bread, rice, potatoes and pasta, but allows unlimited amounts of protein-heavy meat, fish and eggs.

It comes as the Government prepares to launch the first official investigation into Atkins and other diets.

Some 10million Britons are dieting at any one time with up to three million following Atkins, a favourite of celebrities such as Jennifer Aniston, Robbie Williams and Geri Halliwell.

But the popularity of the diet has raised a number of health concerns. Experts have linked the regime to increased risks of heart disease, diabetes, kidney damage, bowel problems and even fertility problems.

However, a U.S. study has now found that reducing carbohydrate intake might lower the risk of breast cancer.

The scientists studied almost 2,000 women in Mexico, where high carbohydrate diets are common.

They found that women who obtained 57% or more of their total calories from carbohydrates were more than twice as likely to get breast cancer as those on more balanced diets.

Professor Walter Willett, from the Harvard School of Public Health in Boston, who led the research, said: "Scientists have long suspected that diet was among the factors contributing to breast cancer.

"Now we are beginning gradually to understand what elements of diet specifically are associated with the disease."

Of all the carbohydrate compounds, the sugars sucrose and fructose showed the strongest association with breast cancer risk.

Sucrose, derived from sugar cane, sorghum and sugar beet, is most commonly found in table sugar and sweetened foods and drinks. Fructose is a component of sucrose and is also found in fruit.

Professor Willett said more work needed to be done, but scientists think the link to breast cancer may be related to elevated levels of insulin and hormone IGF.

Eating sweets and starchy foods causes a rapid rise in the body's blood sugar levels, which in turn triggers the production of insulin.

This promotes cell division and leads to higher levels of oestrogen in the blood, both of which can encourage cancer. The findings were outlined in the journal Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and Prevention. The study also found that fibre consumption was linked to a lower risk of cancer, possibly because it affected the absorption of carbohydrates.

Professor Willett warned that the findings did not mean it was healthy to indulge in diets that were loaded with meat, cheese or fats.

"If people do want to cut back on carbohydrates, it's really important to do it in a way that emphasises healthy fats, like salads with salad dressings," he said.

In Britain, the National Institute of Clinical Excellence will next month draw together a panel of experts including doctors and nutritionists who will evaluate diets such as Atkins and the diet industry as a whole.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

