TITLE	HRT patch to fight prostate cancer

By ROGER DOBSON, Daily Mail

Last updated at 11:58 31 August 2004

HRT skin patches used by women to relieve menopausal symptoms could help men with prostate cancer. Men who used the patches had less fatigue, fewer memory problems and lower cholesterol levels, according to a new study.

Doctors say the patches may also reduce the risk of blood clots associated with oral therapy.

"Our data suggest that oestrogen skin patches counteract the adverse effects of hormone therapy that raise cholesterol in men with prostate cancer," says Dr Tomasz Beer, who led the trial.

The aim of hormone therapy for advanced prostate cancer is to cut the supply of the male hormone testosterone, thought to encourage the growth of the cancer.

Higher cholesterol

But research shows that while suppressing testosterone can control the growth of the cancer, it's associated with higher cholesterol, putting men at greater risk of premature heart disease.

Oestrogen is known to work against testosterone, but when given orally it has been linked to a high risk of blood clots.

The theory behind the new research was that giving oestrogen through the skin would cut down on side-effects, which can include hot flushes, fatigue and memory loss, as well as increased cholesterol levels. In the trial, the results of which were reported at an international conference of cancer specialists, patients aged 49 to 92 were treated with six 7.6-milligram oestrogen patches every seven days for eight weeks.

Blood cholesterol levels were measured before and eight weeks after the therapy began, and body fat was recorded.

The researchers found that cholesterol levels fell significantly, but did not trigger an increase in levels of triglycerides, compounds found in bad cholesterol. A second part of the study showed that the men given the patches performed better on memory tests.

"We found that transdermal oestrogen decreased overall cholesterol levels by 10%," says Dr Beer. "The effect was even greater on bad cholesterol, while good cholesterol increased. The patch oestrogen did not cause triglyceride levels to rise, which is common with oral oestrogen preparations.

"Oestrogen skin patches may prove to be an alternative to common methods of hormone deprivation for prostate cancer."

Better quality of life

Dr Beer and his team at the Oregon Health and Science University Cancer Institute in the U.S. say that bigger studies are now needed.

Scientists at London's Hammersmith Hospital and Imperial College have also tested the effectiveness of HRT skin patches on a number of men.

A preliminary study on 20 patients with advanced prostate cancer has found that they enjoyed a far better quality-of life when using patches. Their disease also regressed, and bone density improved.

"The beauty of patch therapy is that it not only leads to disease regression, it does so with far fewer side effects," said Paul Abel, one of the consultants involved in the trial.

"It actually improves the overall quality of life and can be removed at any time - for example, should side-effects develop. It holds real promise for prostate cancer sufferers, giving an efficient, easy and cost-effective alternative to the current therapies."

Prostate cancer most often affects men over the age of 50 and around 20,000 cases a year are diagnosed in the UK.

Although the causes of prostate cancer are unknown, testosterone is required for it to develop and grow, which is why reduction or removal of testosterone is the mainstay of treatment in advanced cases.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

