TITLE	Smoking ban could save 5,000 lives a year

Last updated at 11:16 15 September 2004

Banning smoking in public places could save more lives more quickly than the creation of a single new anti-cancer drug, campaigners saisay.

Leading cancer charity Cancer Research UK has set out its top 10 priorities for the Government to take action to tackle the disease.

Chief executive Professor Alex Markham argued that the single most important contribution to tackling cancer in the next decade was legislation to outlaw smoking in pubs, restaurants and other workplaces.

The Government is currently considering such a move but is thought unlikely to introduce a nationwide ban in the near future.

Prof Markham said he believed a ban would not only protect those working in the hospitality industry but would also encourage people who smoke while out socialising to kick the habit.

The charity also called for limits on the advertising of junk foods in efforts to make people eat more healthily and reduce their risk of cancer and other diseases.

Scientists have estimated that a smoking ban would lead to almost 5,000 lives being saved each year.

Non-smokers who are exposed to smoke in the workplace are estimated to increase their risk of lung cancer by up to 19%.

Other research has shown that second-hand smoke in the workplace causes 700 deaths a year across the UK, including the deaths of 50 hospitality workers.

Prof Markham said smoking killed 114,000 people a year and the charity was committed to finding the best ways to treat the disease. But he said second-hand smoke remained a real concern. "I believe a single piece of legislation would be the most effective thing we could do to save lives when you compare it with the time and money it takes to develop a first-class drug. "In a recent poll of more than 4,000 people, four out of five said they would support a law to ensure enclosed workplaces are smoke-free," Prof Markham said. "Sir Liam Donaldson, the Chief Medical Officer, has reported that there would be no negative economic impact if a national ban were to be put in place. "Health professionals throughout the country, including the heads of 13 Royal Colleges, believe, with Cancer Research UK, that everyone has the right to breathe clean air." The charity's new policy document - The Cancer Challenge: Agenda For Change - includes the following top 10 priorities for the next Government: :: Implement a national ban on smoking in workplaces and enclosed public places without further delay. :: Promote responsible food labelling and marketing, and place limits on the advertising of "junk" foods. :: Spend 1.5% of the total NHS budget on medical research across the UK. :: Recruit and train sufficient manpower for cancer treatment and undertake an evaluation into the need for, and supply of, skilled personnel. :: Protect the right of all patients to choose to take genetic tests free from the fear of future discrimination on genetic grounds. :: Safeguard the future of publicly-funded research in universities and institutes through sustained investment in infrastructure. :: Develop mechanisms, in partnership with research funders, to translate research findings into new treatments. :: Collaborate more closely with the scientific community to ensure that increased regulation does not needlessly impede research. :: Relieve the indirect tax burden of irrecoverable VAT, which currently affects charities disproportionately. :: Implement a comprehensive and mandatory unclaimed assets register to enable charities to find assets originally intended for them.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

