TITLE	Vitamin pills could cause early deaths

Last updated at 13:49 01 October 2004

Careless use of vitamins, taken by millions in the belief that they promote good health, could be causing thousands of premature deaths, scientists said today.

A study investigating whether antioxidant vitamin supplements can prevent cancer found that rather than saving lives they seemed to increase overall risk of death.

Although the effect was small, it amounted to 9,000 premature deaths among every million supplement users.

Risk of death

The researchers, led by Dr Goran Bjelakovic, from the University of Nis, Serbia and Montenegro, wrote in the Lancet medical journal: "Our results for the detrimental effect of antioxidant supplements on mortality were unexpected."

However they warned that the findings were preliminary, and may partly be due to people taking vitamin doses above recommended levels.

The scientists pooled the results of 14 trials involving a total of 170,000 participants which recorded cancers of the gullet, stomach and intestine, bowel, pancreas and liver.

Analysis showed no protective effect from taking supplements of beta-carotene, vitamins A, C and E, and selenium, alone or in combination.

In half the trials, categorised as being of high quality, there was a small but statistically significant increased risk of premature death among those taking supplements.

Two combinations of supplements were associated with increased mortality.

The risk of death was 30% higher for people taking beta-carotene and vitamin A than for those not taking the combination.

In the case of people taking beta-carotene and vitamin E, relative risk was raised by 10%.

Beta-carotene is a nutrient found in yellow and orange vegetables and fruit that can be converted to vitamin A in the body.

Four trials suggested that selenium was associated with a reduction in cancer risk, but the authors said this may have been the result of poorly conducted studies.

More than 12 million women and eight million men regularly take vitamin supplements in the UK.

Most will be taking vitamins at reasonable doses, but the new findings suggest many could be at risk.

'Scary speculation'

Antioxidants are supposed to neutralise unstable molecules that can damage cell membranes and DNA.

In a commentary accompanying the Lancet paper, Professor David Forman, of the University of Leeds, and Professor Douglas Altman, from Cancer Research UK, wrote: "The prospect that vitamin pills may not only do no good but also kill their consumers is a scary speculation given the vast quantities that are used in certain communities."

But they pointed out that the death rate analysis was incomplete and should not at this stage be seen as "convincing proof of hazard".

The two experts added: "In the event that a hazard is established from a complete review, these researchers will need to identify which specific interventions are associated with any risk."

Previous studies have already raised a question mark over the safety of some vitamin supplements.

One set of trials, looking at prevention of lung cancer, indicated that beta-carotene could increase the risk of disease.

Another study in 1998 suggested that high doses of vitamin C could damage DNA.

In 2002 results from a study of people at high risk of heart and artery disease showed that antioxidant supplements offered no protection against heart attack, stroke or cancer over five years.

Last year the Food Standards Agency warned that high doses of certain vitamins and minerals may have irreversible harmful effects.

The warning followed a major review of 31 vitamins and minerals by an expert group from the agency.

It singled out five substances that may cause permanent damage if taken in large quantities over a long period.

They were beta-carotene, which was linked to an increased risk of lung cancer in smokers, manganese, (muscle and nerve disorders in older people), nicotinic acid (cell damage), phosphorus (damage to organs and tissues) and zinc (damage to the immune system).

People were also advised against consuming more than 10mg per day of vitamin B6 unless they were acting on medical advice.

A spokeswoman for the Food Standards Agency said: "The conclusions of this meta-analysis support the agency's recommendations for a balanced diet which should include plenty of fruit and vegetables for good health.

"As reported by the expert group on vitamins and minerals, there is strong evidence that excess of some vitamins and minerals can cause ill-health."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

