TITLE	New study to test breast cancer drug

Last updated at 10:39 04 October 2004

A major study into breast cancer will look at the effectiveness of a new drug to prevent the disease and save thousands of lives.

The ten year study involving 10,000 women will test a new drug called anastrozole.

The drug has already been shown to be the most effective hormone treatment for breast cancer but now doctors are hoping to examine its use as a preventative measure.

Around 30,000 post menopausal women are diagnosed with the disease in the UK annually, so if successful this intervention could lead to several thousand fewer women developing the cancer.

'Promising option'

Anastrozole will be given to 10,000 healthy women who are at an increased risk of the disease.

Now doctors just need to recruit the women to take part in the International Breast Cancer Intervention Study II, with more than 50 centres open for recruitment worldwide - including moret than 30 in the UK.

Cancer Research UK's head of clinical trials Kate Law said: "Anastrozole looks like a very promising option, but the only way we will know for sure is to carry out this large scale trial.

If the drug lives up to its promise, thousands of cancers could be prevented in the UK alone."

Doctors and clinicians at Dundee University are among the health professionals carrying out the trial.

Professor Alastair Thompson, Professor of Surgical Oncology at Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, is leading the trial in Dundee.

He said: "The trial will compare anastrozole with a placebo and look at how many women develop breast cancer as well as any side effects of the drug.

"It will be the first opportunity for women to take anastrozole as a preventive measure.

Although only half of the women on the trial will receive the new drug, all of the women will receive a bone scan, breast screening every 18 months and the best available care and monitoring."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

