TITLE	Is the pill good for women after all?

Last updated at 12:46 22 October 2004

Women on the birth control pill had surprisingly lower risks of heart disease, strokes and breast cancer, according to the largest women's health study ever done.

The findings by the Women's Health Initiative in the US - the biggest study on oral contraceptives - are contrary to what many previous studies have found.

Results from nearly 162,000 participants were presented at an American Society for Reproductive Medicine conference in Philadelphia.

The same US study that led millions of women to abandon use of hormones after menopause now provides reassurance that the pill is safe.

Doctors say the type of hormones and the stage of life when they are used may be what makes them helpful at one point and harmful at another.

"We're still learning more and more about the biology," said one of the researchers, Dr Michael Diamond of Wayne State University in Detroit.

About 16 million American women currently take birth control pills and hundreds of millions have used them since the first one came on the market in 1960. Most combine synthetic forms of oestrogen and progestin in various doses.

Heart disease link

Women taking these hormones after menopause were more likely to have heart disease and certain cancers - a finding that prompted part of this study to be stopped in 2002.

Previous research on oral contraceptives suggested that they, too, raised the chances of heart disease.

But the new study found the opposite - lower risk of heart attacks, strokes, high cholesterol, high blood pressure and other heart-related problems among the 67,000 women in the study who had ever taken the pill.

Overall, "there's an 8% risk reduction of ever having cardiovascular disease" among women who had ever taken birth control pills, said the lead researcher, Dr Rahi Victory of Wayne State. "If you use oral contraceptives early on, you're probably going to be protected later in life."

Women on the pill also had a 7% lower risk of developing any form of cancer - a small benefit that increased with length of use, Victory said. For example, women who took birth control pills for four years or more had 42% lower risk of ovarian cancer and 30% lower chances of developing uterine cancer.

No effect was seen on the risk of some specific cancers - breast, colon or bladder. But that was good news because of the previous work suggesting pill use made breast cancer more likely.

Studies in animals suggest that oestrogen may reduce inflammation in the bloodstream and help prevent deposits from forming and blocking vessels, Victory said. But that was seen in animals whose oestrogen levels were relatively constant for a long time - not the situation of women whose oestrogen declines before menopause.

"Those women went for a prolonged period of time without oestrogen and then were re-exposed to oestrogen" when they took so-called hormone replacement therapy after menopause, Victory said.

"By that time, they may already have atherosclerotic plaque in their arteries," Diamond added. "At that time, oestrogen may aggravate the disease."

Dr Robert Rebar, a gynaecologist who is executive director of the reproductive medicine group, said the type of hormone may make a difference, too. Birth control pills contain four to six times the amount of oestrogen as even the lowest formulations of hormone replacement therapy. But the most popular form of the latter uses oestrogen derived from horse urine birth control pills use a synthetic, manufactured form of it.

"That is totally different," he said. "We can't equate them."

The &pound;349 million Women's Health Initiative study was done at 40 locations around the US and funded by the National Institutes of Health. No oral contraceptive makers financed any part of that research.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

