TITLE	What should I do about HRT?

Last updated at 16:46 28 October 2004

I don't think HRT is really quite the baddy it is made out to be. Yes, it can, very slightly increase the risk of breast cancer, and this risk increases the longer your stay on it. But even after 9 years, that increase in risk is still quite small.

However, that doesn't mean that it should be ignored, and you should take it into account when making decision about whether or not to take HRT - especially if you have other factors that put you at slightly increased risk of developing breast cancer, such as a family history (especially in your mother or sisters), or if you drink a lot of alcohol, are overweight, or didn't start your family till you were in your mid thirties.

But - and it's a big but - HRT can also do you a lot of good. It can reduce the risk of bowel cancer, it can help prevent osteoporosis, and most importantly of all, it can help improve your quality of life - a fact that often gets ignored in research studies. It really is the best treatment for menopausal flushes and sweats, which are caused by the plummeting levels of oestrogen that occur at this time. Unfortunately, when you come off HRT (which contains oestrogen) hormone levels fall again, and this can trigger flushes and sweats, especially if you stop HRT suddenly - and it sounds as if this is what has happened to you. The herbal remedy Black Cohash, and products containing phyto-oestrogens (such as Aria) may help ease the flushes and sweats a bit, and may be worth a try - but don't expect miracle from them.

Your symptoms should eventually ease, as your body gets used to low oestrogen levels, but be warned, this could take many months. One option worth considering is to go back on a low dose of HRT, which would make your life more bearable, and then after a few months come of it again, but this time really slowly. Your GP should be happy to help you with this.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

