TITLE	Vaccine could wipe out cervical cancer

Last updated at 12:52 29 October 2004

Thousands of lives could be saved by a new vaccine which cuts women's chances of contracting cervical cancer by combating the sexually transmitted virus which triggers most cases of the killer disease.

Cervarix, which could be available inside three years if trials prove successful, could also eventually spell the end for smear tests, which many women find unpleasant.

The vaccine works against the human papilloma virus (HPV) which accounts for around 99.9% of cervical cancer. The virus is passed on through sexual contact so injections would have to be given to girls before they become sexually active.

Drugs giant GlaxoSmithKline has unveiled Cervarix as one of a range of new "blockbusters" it is currently testing and they hope it will be available by 2007.

'Major contribution to healthcare'

Trials have shown the vaccine to be 100% effective so far in preventing persistent infection by the two most "high risk" strains of HPV. Glaxo hopes to extend the protection to cover other strains of the virus.

A Glaxo spokesman said: "We are very excited about the vaccine. We think it should make a major contribution to improve healthcare globally as cervical cancer is the number two cancer killer of women worldwide."

Cervical cancer claims around 1,600 lives in the UK each year - half of the 3,200 which are diagnosed.

At least 50% of women have been exposed to the virus, which sometimes causes genital warts, but the majority are unaware as they do not show any symptoms.

In most cases, the virus is disposed of by the body's immune system in six months.

But in 1%-2% of cases the immune system fails to get rid of it and it goes on to cause abnormalities in the cervical cells, which can potentially develop into cancer.

Doctors at four UK centres are involved in the trials.

'Most exciting development'

Dr Anne Szarewski, a clinical consultant at Cancer Research UK, is leading the London trials.

She said: "This vaccine is the most exciting development in cervical cancer research because it is mainly caused by a virus so the obvious thing to do is get a vaccine.

"Although we have produced screening tests, that is just chipping away at the edges and not getting to the root of the cause so if we have a vaccine we can prevent this happening.

"It would be amazing if we found a cancer that we could eradicate through a vaccine."

Dr Szarewski added there was another bonus: "At the moment women are anxious about even having smears and a lot find it uncomfortable, unpleasant and off-putting, so if there was a vaccine it may eventually eliminate the need for them.

"It would have to protect against more than 70% to completely remove the need for screening. If they (Glaxo) added one or two more strains of the virus, they would achieve that.

"If we could get to 80% or more, we could certainly stop smears. Although we can only stop screening when we have reached the point when everyone's been vaccinated."

Clinical trials

Cervarix has so far been tested in a study involving around 1,100 women aged between 15-25 across 14 countries including the US, Brazil and Canada. The trials, which started midway through this year, are scheduled to last approximately four years.

Glaxo is planning to submit an application for Cervarix to the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency in 2006.

The UK trials involve around 400 women split between Dr Szarewski's Margaret Pyke Centre clinic in central London, St George's Hospital in south London, St Mary's Hospital in Manchester and the University of Aberdeen.

Three injections of the drug would be given over a six-month period. It could provide lifetime immunity, although boosters may also be required.

Under the national screening programme, women aged 20-64 can have smear tests every three to five years.

If pre-cancerous tissue or a small tumour is detected, doctors can usually treat it with radiotherapy or surgery to remove part or all of the cervix. In more serious cases they may also have to remove the womb.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

