TITLE	Mouth cancer warning for binge drinkers

Last updated at 17:06 08 November 2004

Mouth cancer cases could could soar because young people are drinking and smoking more, dentists have warned.

Each year in the UK there are around 4,300 new cases of mouth cancer, which affects the lips, tongue, cheek and throat, and 1,700 deaths.

But despite this many people are unaware that alcohol is one of the major risk factors for the disease, research has revealed.

A survey of more than 200 dentists found that 85% believed the trend in increased alcohol consumption and tobacco use among those aged 18-30 would lead to an increase in mouth cancer.

More than half of dentists (55%) also said they feared that cannabis declassification would add to the number of people being struck by mouth cancer.

Increased risks

A poll of over 1,000 people, carried out by Denplan, found that only 33% of women and 28% of men were aware that alcohol was a major risk factor for the disease.

The research came ahead of Mouth Cancer Awareness Week, which runs from November 7-13, co-ordinated by the British Dental Health Foundation and supported by Denplan.

Less than a third of people (31%) believed that drinking alcohol increased the chances of getting mouth cancer.

But experts believe that excessive alcohol consumption can increase the risk of mouth cancer by up to 30 times.

Dentists are specially trained to detect early signs of mouth cancer which may not always be seen by the patient, such as sores, white patches or lumps in the mouth.

But as growing numbers find it more difficult to find an NHS dentist, many people are not going for check-ups on a regular basis.

Dr Henry Clover, dental advisory at Denplan, said: "It is deeply worrying that the risks associated with mouth cancer are either extremely poorly publicised or just plain ignored, especially with regards to alcohol.

"There is also a risk that cannabis declassification and the lifestyle of the 18-30 age group could increase prevalence in the future.

"Alcohol is a carcinogen, a cancer-causing substance, and dentists overwhelmingly think men and women are lining up for problems including mouth cancer if they continue as they are."

Dental checks

Early detection plays a major part in surviving mouth cancer, with the chances of survival increase from 50% to 90% if it is treated fast enough.

Dr Nigel Carter said: "The first sign of mouth cancer is often an ulcer that doesn't heal or a red or white patch in the mouth.

"Many people choose to ignore these symptoms but anyone who has had an ulcer for more than three weeks should get it checked by their dentist or doctor.

"You never know, it could save your life."

Dr Julie Sharp, senior science information officer for Cancer Research UK, said: "Most cases of mouth cancer could be completely avoided.

"Three-quarters of mouth cancers occur in people who smoke or chew tobacco and drink too much alcohol.

"This survey shows that while most people are aware of the dangers of smoking, the majority are unaware of the effects of alcohol in causing mouth cancer.

"However, mouth cancer that is detected early can be successfully treated.

"This is why it's important to go for regular dental check-ups, especially if you smoke or chew tobacco and drink alcohol."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

