TITLE	Milk linked to ovarian cancer

Last updated at 10:57 29 November 2004

Consuming a large amount of milk is linked to an increased risk of ovarian cancer, research has revealed.

A study involving more than 60,000 women in Sweden found that drinking more than two glasses of milk significantly increased the chances of the most serious form of ovarian cancer.

It follows past claims that dairy products are linked to certain types of cancer, including breast and prostate cancer.

The study, published in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, followed 61,084 women aged 38 to 76 who were part of the Swedish Mammography Cohort.

Their diet was assessed between 1987 and 1990 using a food-frequency questionnaire, and they were followed up for around 13 years.

'Strong evidence'

During this time a total of 266 women were diagnosed with ovarian cancer, of whom 125 had serious ovarian cancer.

The researchers, led by Dr Susanna Larsson from the Karolinska Institute, found that women who consumed more than four servings of dairy products a day had twice the risk of serious ovarian cancer than women who had fewer than two.

They found that milk had the strongest link with ovarian cancer, with those drinking two or more glasses facing double the risk of those who consumed it never or seldom.

The team concluded: "Our data indicate that high intakes of lactose and dairy products, particularly milk, are associated with an increased risk of serious ovarian cancer but not of other sub-types of ovarian cancer."

Around 6,700 women in the UK are diagnosed with ovarian cancer each year.

Earlier this year researcher Professor Jane Plant said people should avoid milk and cheese as much as tobacco.

She said there was strong evidence that dairy products promote breast cancer in women and prostate cancer in men.

Other experts claim that the calcium in milk and other dairy products is crucial in maintaining healthy bones and preventing osteoporosis in later life.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

