TITLE	HRT should only be taken for the short-term

Last updated at 09:18 30 November 2004

Hormone replacement therapy, which has been linked to an increased risk of breast cancer and stroke, should be used only in the short term to relieve menopausal symptoms, experts say.

Increased knowledge about the dangers of long-term use of HRT in the last two years has led to falling numbers of prescriptions and widespread confusion among women and the medical profession.

Now the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) has reviewed all the data surrounding HRT to make a series of recommendations which appear in its new book Menopause and Hormone Replacement.

The college says that HRT should continue to be prescribed for women with severe menopausal symptoms, which include hot flushes and night sweats.

They said that for women who were not suffering from menopausal symptoms the risks of taking HRT outweighed the benefits.

HRT has in some cases been prescribed to women in efforts to reduce the risks of osteoporosis, a measure which is now discouraged.

The RCOG also said that ultimately women should have the choice to take HRT provided that they understood the risks.

Two major studies have highlighted the increased risks involved in the use of HRT.

The Women's Health Initiative trial in the US failed to show the expected cardiovascular protection of HRT, while the UK's Million Women Study confirmed that long-term use of HRT increased the risk of breast cancer.

But some experts have suggested that many women have rushed to give up HRT on health grounds when the benefits to the individual's quality of life may outweigh the risks.

The issue was being discussed today during a meeting at the RCOG in London.

The college's recommendations match those made by the Government's Committee on Safety of Medicines, which concluded that HRT was beneficial for the short-term treatment of menopausal symptoms.

Prof Valerie Beral, director of Cancer Research UK's epidemiology unit at the University of Oxford, said: "This new report clearly lays out the risks and benefits associated with taking HRT.

"We know that the drug can offer short-term benefit for relieving menopausal symptoms but we also know that the longer women take HRT, the greater the risks of breast cancer and strokes."

Prof Shaughn O'Brien, the RCOG's junior vice president, added: "This study group consensus of gynaecologists, physicians, epidemiologists and scientists clarifies all that is currently known about the benefits and risks of HRT.

"75% of women complain of significant menopausal symptoms.

"The short-term use of HRT for these women can be prescribed with relatively little risk.

"For longer-term therapy the risks really must be weighed up by the patient and her doctor together.

"This book provides a unique and contemporary guide to assist this decision."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

