TITLE	Cancer doctors hail new 'wonder drug'

Last updated at 12:23 08 December 2004

A new breast cancer drug is 10 per cent better at stopping the disease returning than the most effective treatment currently available in the UK, research has revealed.

Doctors testing Arimidex say it is certain to replace the gold standard tamoxifen in the next few years.

But there are fears that introducing the drug will cost the NHS tens of millions of pounds more each year.

Tamoxifen only costs &pound;20-30 per year per patient. Arimidex (also called anastrozole) is likely to cost more than &pound;1,000 per patient per year.

But experts say paying the extra cost will be worth it in terms of the extra lives saved.

Professor Anthony Howell, a researcher from Manchester's Christie Hospital who has been testing the drug, said: "I think it is important, because if we prevent recurrences, that will translate into improvements in survival. Also the overall toxicity is less."

Professor Howell, a lead researcher in the trial, is due to unveil the results of his study at a conference in the U.S. today.

The results will be released simultaneously on the website of the medical journal The Lancet.

38,000 new cases a year

Each year 38,000 women in the UK are newly diagnosed with breast cancer and 13,100 women die from the disease.

One woman in nine in the UK will suffer with it during her lifetime.

Tamoxifen, which has proved the most effective drug in treating breast cancer in recent years, has been used for more than 20 years since its development in Britain.

It has cut in half the number of women whose breast cancers return after treatment.

Doctors said that in recent trials anastrozole scored better than tamoxifen on almost every measure.

As well as being 10 per cent better at stopping cancer returningit also increased the average length of time taken before cancer returned by 20 per cent.

It reduced the spread of cancer to other parts of the body by 14 per cent and it cut the chances of the cancer appearing in the other breast by 40 per cent.

Using the drug also decreased side-effects, although women on Arimidex suffered more bone fractures than those on tamoxifen.

But tamoxifen raises the risk of cancer of the lining of the womb. Researchers found that more than 5 per cent of women using tamoxifen had gone though hysterectomies, but only 1.3 per cent of women on Arimidex had had the operation.

Arimidex is one of a new type of breast cancer drug called aromatase inhibitors.

There are two other aromatase inhibitors which have had simifastestlar results in tests but anastrozole has been the most widely tested so far.

Professor Howell said that in the U.S. more than 50 per cent of women who have had surgery for breast cancer are already receiving Arimidex.

AstraZeneca, which manufactures the drug, said last night that it would be seeking an extended licence for the drug in the UK.

Early results

In 2001, when there were only early results from tests available, the UK's drug licensing authority said it wanted "more mature data" before providing a licence.

The drug has now been undergoing tests for five years so experts expect the NHS to start looking at whether it wants to use the drug in treatment soon.

Cancer charities say they are hopeful the NHS will introduce it in the next few years.

Lesley Warner, cancer information officer at Cancer Research, said: "I think the NHS is going to have to find some way of funding the cost of treatment with anastrozole."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

