TITLE	Folic acid 'may be linked to breast cancer'

Last updated at 10:37 10 December 2004

Women who take high doses of folic acid during pregnancy may increase the risk of developing breast cancer in later years, a study claims.

The research, involving almost 3,000 pregnant women, found that in those taking a 5mg supplement of folate the risk of deaths from breast cancer was twice as great compared to those taking a dummy pill.

But the researchers said it may simply be a chance finding, while other studies have suggested that folic acid could actually reduce the risk of breast cancer.

Campaigners said women should continue to take the supplements as recommended by the Department of Health, and the small numbers involved in the new study were not statistically significant.

Women trying for a baby are advised to take a daily 0.4mg supplement of folic acid before conception and for the first 12 weeks of pregnancy in order to reduce the risk of neural tube defects like spina bifida.

However the latest study, published in the British Medical Journal, looked only at women given 0.2mg or 5mg doses, with the majority of women starting to take the supplements after 12 weeks and until the end of their pregnancy.

The researchers, from the University of Bristol and the University of Aberdeen, followed the women from the 1960s until September 2002.

Further research needed

During this time 210 women died, with 40 deaths due to cardiovascular disease, 112 due to cancer and 31 to breast cancer.

The researchers said: "In women randomised to high doses of supplemental folate... the risk of deaths attributable to breast cancer was twice as great."

But researcher Dr Andy Ness said: "Our paper presents preliminary findings which are intended to point the way towards further research and it is published on that basis.

"It is entirely possible that this is a chance finding, so further scientific studies are required to examine the association, if there is one, before we reach any conclusions."

He said it was important not to confuse women about the need to take folic acid supplements early in pregnancy.

"Women planning to become pregnant should take folic acid supplements as recommended as there is a considerable difference between the trial and the current guidelines to prospective mothers," Dr Ness added.

In a commentary also published in the BMJ, US researchers Godfrey Oakley and Jack Mandel pointed out that other research suggested folic acid was likely to prevent breast cancer rather than cause it.

Health benefits

Andrew Russell, executive director of the Association for Spina Bifida and Hydrocephalus, said the paper was cautious in claiming any causal relationship between folic acid and breast cancer.

"There is a higher risk associated with the abortions carried out on up to 1,000 UK women each year following the diagnosis of a spina bifida, or other neural tube defect, pregnancy," he said.

"Researchers from the federal government department Health Canada found that the proportion of babies born with neural tube defects dropped by 78% after the compulsory addition of folic acid to flour cornmeal and pasta in 1998."

Antonia Bunnin, from charity Breakthrough Breast Cancer, said: "These are preliminary findings which should be treated with caution - folate has known health benefits and other studies have suggested that it may help prevent breast cancer in some women.

"More research is needed into the long-term effects of folate intake on breast cancer risk before firm conclusions can be made."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

