TITLE	Stronger measures needed to tackle cancer

Last updated at 09:34 20 December 2004

More aggressive measures to cut smoking and promote a healthy lifestyle are needed to reduce cancer deaths in the future, experts say.

Prevention schemes such as advertising campaigns and screening programmes have already helped to cut cancer deaths, the Health Development Agency (HDA) said.

But a further 29 per cent drop in deaths was possible in the next 20 years with improved measures to discourage smoking and tackle poor diets and obesity, according to the report published today.

Research has suggested that diet is second only to smoking as a cause of cancer.

Effective treatments

The HDA also said while screening programmes to detect early disease were effective for some cancers, they were not worthwhile for others.

They said screening programmes for breast and cervical cancer should continue, but evidence did not support screening for lung or prostate cancer.

The new briefing paper - the contribution of smoking, diet and treatment to cancer mortality in the under-75s - outlines the progress made in cutting cancer deaths in England and Wales.

It points out that the majority of people diagnosed with cancer - 65% - are over the age of 65 and it is predominantly a disease of older people.

For a cancer like lung cancer, where there are less treatment options, primary prevention in the form of campaigns to stop people smoking would have the biggest impact on mortality, the experts said.

But for breast cancer and cervical cancer, where there are more effective treatments, secondary prevention in the form of screening was effective.

Smoking-related cancer deaths account for around a third of all cancer deaths.

But other lifestyle factors can also be a significant risk, the HDA said.

Change in diet

Estimates suggest that changes in diet could prevent a third of cancers.

Research has also shown that primary prevention in the form of educational campaigns and government legislation are around seven times more effective than secondary prevention such as screening programmes.

The HDA said there needed to be a greater emphasis on cutting smoking in deprived areas because these people were more likely to die from smoking-related illnesses than others in more well-off places.

"An aggressive approach to reduce smoking will continue to drive down numbers of lung and other cancers.

"This will also impact on coronary heart disease," the report said.

The experts said that prevention programmes based on diet, lack of exercise and sun exposure could also be effective in cutting rates of disease.

Researchers have suggested that food and drink cause as many as 80,000 cases of cancer each year in the UK, although the exact link is unknown.

Survival rates

Prof Mike Kelly, director of evidence and guidance at the HDA, said: "Primary prevention such as media campaigns or government legislation are effective with cancers such as lung cancer where not starting to smoke will drastically reduce your chances of developing lung cancer, whereas secondary disease detection, such as screening is not effective with lung cancer.

"It is known after five years, men with lung cancer have a survival rate of only 5-7%, as there is no really effective treatment for lung cancer.

"Whereas with breast cancer, treatment combined with screening can have a positive effect on survival rates."

Dr Lesley Walker, director of cancer information at Cancer Research UK, said: "We agree that aggressive campaigns to reduce smoking are crucial.

"Surveys have shown that two thirds of smokers want to quit and scientists estimate that a UK smoking ban in enclosed public places would lead to 5,000 lives being saved annually.

"We also need to get the message out to smokers, wanting to quit, that they can get help from NHS Stop Smoking Clinics which have been shown to be almost twice as effective at helping people give up than going it alone.

"Cancer Research UK's SunSmart campaign, launched in 2003 with the UK health departments, is a good example of primary prevention with its aim to raise awareness of how people can protect themselves in the sun to reduce the risk of skin cancer."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

