TITLE	Gas in homes causing 1,000 UK deaths a year

Last updated at 13:16 21 December 2004

Almost one in 10 lung cancer deaths is caused by a natural radioactive gas seeping into homes, researchers claim.

Smokers were found to be most at risk from radon, which escapes through the Earth's surface and can build up in indoor areas.

An analysis by researchers has now revealed that radon is responsible for as many as 20,000 deaths from lung cancer in Europe each year.

Around 100,000 homes affected

Writing on bmj.com, they calculated that the gas caused 9% of European lung cancer deaths and 2% of all cancer deaths.

The team, made up of researchers across Europe, said radon in homes posed "substantial hazards" - even at levels below those set by many countries stating when action is deemed necessary.

The UK's National Radiological Protection Board (NRPB) has estimated that around 100,000 properties in Britain are significantly affected by radon.

Earlier this year the NRPB reported concentrations of radon up to 85 times higher than recognised safety limits in two homes in Cornwall.

Most of the radon breathed in is exhaled immediately, but some of the radioactive particles can attach themselves to the lungs, exposing them to damaging levels of radiation.

Exposure to high levels of radon over extended periods leads to an increased risk of lung cancer.

Estimates suggest that around 2,500 cases of lung cancer are caused by indoor radon each year in the UK.

Radon-induced lung cancer

The latest study, the largest of its kind ever conducted, analysed 7,148 cases of lung cancer and a control group of 14,208 people without the disease across nine European countries.

Radon levels in the homes of the subjects were taken into account, along with smoking histories and the impact of second-hand smoke.

They found that the risk of radon-induced lung cancer increased proportionally to how much of the gas people were exposed to.

They concluded that the risk of lung cancer rose by 8.4% per 100 becquerels of radon per cubic metre of air (Bq/m3) increase in radon concentration.

In the UK the NRPB has set an "action level" of 200 becquerels where remedial measures should take place.

The average radon level in British homes is 20 Bq/m3.

'Hazard to be taken seriously'

The researchers said: "We have shown that residential radon produces substantial hazards, particularly among smokers, even at concentrations below the action levels currently recommended in many countries of a few hundred Bq/m3."

They said that average levels of radon in homes in most countries varied widely, with levels in the majority of houses well below the national average while some were several times higher.

Radon levels also tend to be higher in rural areas compared with urban areas.

"High radon concentrations can be reduced in existing homes at moderate cost, and low concentrations can usually be achieved at reasonable or low cost when new buildings are constructed," the team concluded.

In a commentary, also published on bmj.com, Geoff Watts, science editor of the British Medical Journal, said the study was "a reminder that this is a hazard to be taken seriously".

He said the course of action to deal with radon would depend on the construction of the building and the level of the gas dispersed.

"At the lower end of the scale, improving ventilation and sealing cracks in concrete floors may do the trick.

"With suspended timber floors the aim is to increase the flow of air beneath them - either passively through air bricks or by installing a fan.

"In houses with a concrete floor and higher radon levels it may be necessary to dig a sump - a small cavity beneath the floor - from which air is extracted, so removing any troublesome gas that might otherwise find its way into houses," Mr Watts said.

He added that there was little evidence that action was being taken in the UK to tackle the radon problem in homes above recommended safety levels.

Installations designed to protect homes from radon usually cost between &pound;500 and &pound;1,500.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

