TITLE	Mobile phone radiation damages DNA

Last updated at 12:57 22 December 2004

Radio waves from mobile phones do harm cells and damage DNA, European research has revealed.

The four-year Reflex Study found genomes - the carrier of genes - were harmed by exposure to electro-magnetic fields from such technology.

Some of these genes were harmed beyond repair, leading to the potential development of "catastrophic" diseases such as cancer, it was claimed.

Uncertainty over findings

But the study's co-ordinator, Professor Franz Adlkofer of the German research group Verum, warned that the research was carried out in laboratory conditions and did not reflect real life.

"There is a great, great difference between the two," he said. "These experiments were carried out on isolated cell systems, not with human beings."

He said the study, which was carried out by 12 research groups across seven European countries, did not conclude that mobile phones damaged health.

Prof Adlkofer said more research needed to be done, exposing rats and mice to such radiation - something that is being explored by the US National Institute of Health.

He said: "These experiments were carried out in glass tubes, so it is not possible to prove conclusively either way.

"But we feel that this data would support the message that there might be something there."

The three million euro study found that cells exposed to high frequency radio waves showed a significant increase in single and double-strand DNA breaks, much of which could not be repaired.

Intermittent exposure of five-minute bursts proved to be more damaging to cells than constant radiation.

Higher risk for older people

The research also found that older cells were more susceptible to the emissions from low frequency bodies such as power lines as well as the high radio frequencies from telecommunications.

"In old people, the gene repair system is not as effective as it is in younger people," said Prof Adlkofer. "This makes them more vulnerable."

Although there is no direct link, Prof Adlkofer advised people to use landlines rather than mobile phones just as a precaution.

The debate over mobile phones and their potential risks has raged for years, with the phone operators insisting they do not damage users' health.

Approximately 1.5 billion people around the world use mobile phones.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

