TITLE	Olive oil could cut breast cancer risk

Last updated at 11:24 10 January 2005

Scientists have discovered why the Mediterranean diet seems to protect women against breast cancer.

Past research has heralded the apparent ability of diets rich in olive oil to protect against heart disease, colon and breast cancer and Alzheimer's, as well as helping bone development.

Now scientists hope to harness the properties of olive oil for use in future treatments for breast cancer.

Protective effects

The team, from the Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine in Chicago, conducted a series of lab tests to find what effect oleic acid, which is found in olive oil, had on breast cancer cell lines.

They discovered that oleic acid dramatically cut levels of Her-2/neu - a type of cancer-triggering gene called an oncogene.

High levels of Her-2/neu appear in over a fifth of breast cancer patients and are linked with highly aggressive tumours with a poor prognosis.

The researchers, writing in Annals of Oncology, found that oleic acid prevented the gene from becoming over-active.

But other tests on the cell lines showed that oleic acid also boosted the effectiveness of the commonly-used drug Herceptin.

Herceptin targets the Her-2/neu gene and helps prolong the lives of breast cancer sufferers.

Lead researcher Dr Javier Menendez said: "Our findings underpin epidemiological studies that show that the Mediterranean diet has significant protective effects against cancer, heart disease and ageing."

Mediterranean diet

Figures show that people living in Mediterranean countries like Spain and Italy can expect to live several years longer on average than people in the UK and elsewhere.

The strongest evidence of the influence of mono-unsaturated fatty acids, like oleic acid, on breast cancer comes from studies in southern European countries.

But the researchers said animal studies had so far shown mixed results, possibly because olive oil was given in a mixture of fatty acids and not on its own.

Dr Menendez said their study was the first to report that monounsaturated fatty acid in the diet cut the expression of Her-2/neu by 46%.

He said this gene was "one of the most important oncogene in breast cancer".

As well as boosting the effectiveness of Herceptin in killing cancer cells, the researcher said oleic acid increased activity of a protein - p27Kip1 - which was involved in patients becoming resistant to the drug treatment.

Dr Menendez said their findings suggested that dietary measures based on oleic acid may prevent patients becoming resistant to Herceptin.

Anti-tumour activity

The researchers now hope to continue their research to see whether a diet rich in virgin olive oil could make breast cancer tumours less aggressive.

They also want to look at whether oleic acid-rich diets effect the anti-tumour activity of Herceptin.

Dr Menendez was cautious about the findings so far, saying that lab results did not always translate into clinical practice.

But he said the findings suggested that higher levels of oleic acid in breast tissue could boost the chances of patients carrying high levels of the rogue gene.

"They may also help in designing future epidemiological studies and, eventually, dietary counselling to delay or prevent drug resistance developing in patients taking Herceptin," Dr Menendez said.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

