TITLE	Shocking ignorance over cancer risks

Last updated at 12:19 12 January 2005

The public is alarmingly ignorant about how it can reduce the risk of developing cancer, campaigners have warned.

While the majority of people knew that smoking and getting sunburnt increased the danger of the disease, most were not aware of the importance of diet and alcohol in reducing cancer risks, according to a survey.

The results came as Cancer Research UK launched a new campaign - Reduce The Risk - to tell people how lifestyle changes can drastically alter their odds of being diagnosed with cancer.

The charity said that research showed that at least half of all cases of cancer could be prevented, but that message needed to be communicated to the public.

Their poll of 4,000 people found that two-thirds were unaware that being overweight or obese increased the risk of some cancers.

It also found that 67% did not know that a diet low in fruit and vegetables could increase their chance of getting the disease.

Only a third of those polled highlighted drinking less alcohol, as a way of reducing the risk of cancer.

And 75% were ignorant of the cancer risks posed by using hormone replacement therapy or having large numbers of sexual partners.

In comparison 24% believed living near power lines was a risk for cancer, and more than a third thought stress was linked to the disease - although there is no strong scientific evidence to support these beliefs.

But 90% were aware that smoking increased the chances of developing cancer.

The new CRUK campaign will see thousands of GP practices, hospitals, shops and leisure centres receiving leaflets and posters with key messages about diet, exercise and other measures to reduce the risk of cancer.

More than 270,000 people in Britain are diagnosed with cancer each year.

Reducing the risk

Prof Alex Markham, CRUK's chief executive, said: "The fundamental aim of this campaign is to alert everyone to the fact that each one of us can reduce our risk of getting cancer.

"We estimate that half of cancer cases could be prevented.

"There is no magic pill to prevent us getting the disease but there are many things we can all do in our daily lives to improve our chances of avoiding it."

Prof Markham said they were already making headway with tobacco, but there was much more to do.

"Lack of awareness among the public is a major concern.

"It is important for people to realise that being a healthy weight and eating a properly balanced diet with plenty of fruit and vegetables can really make a difference to their cancer risk, as can maintaining an active lifestyle and taking advantage of screening programmes," he added.

TV presenter Gaby Roslin, who helped launch the campaign, said it had struck a very personal chord with her.

Bonuses of improved lifestyle

"Nine years ago my father was diagnosed with bowel cancer but he is now doing very well. "Sadly, my mother died from lung cancer almost eight years ago.

"Because of what happened in my family I have tried hard to improve my lifestyle and have a much better diet now than when I was younger.

"I drink plenty of water and eat loads of fresh fruit and veg and fresh fish.

"The truth is I feel a lot better and I have lost weight too, so the bonuses of changing your lifestyle are about now as well as the future," she said.

Actor Martin Clunes, who is also supporting the campaign, said: "I think Cancer Research UK has come up with a terrific campaign for anyone who wants to find out how they really can cut their chances of getting cancer.

"Reduce the Risk will make people like me - who are in their 40s - start to think about their health seriously perhaps for the first time.

"And as a parent you do start worrying a lot more about staying healthy for the future because you have that extra responsibility."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

