TITLE	How having a pint could protect against cancer

Last updated at 11:33 20 January 2005

A mystery ingredient in beer may protect against cancer, it has been claimed.

Unidentified compounds in lager and stout may neutralise cancer-causing agents in food, Japanese scientists believe.

They appeared to reduce DNA damage to the livers, lungs and kidneys of laboratory mice by up to 85%. But whether or not this really is good news for beer drinkers remains to be seen.

The mice in the study were given non-alcoholic beer - and excessive alcohol consumption is known to increase the risk of cancer.

Non-alcoholic beer

On the other hand previous studies suggest that beer protects against heart disease, cataracts, and Alzheimer's.

Sakae Arimoto-Kobayashi, who led the new research at Okayama University, said: "The total benefits and risks of beer with alcohol are still under consideration."

Some cancers are triggered by DNA-damaging chemicals called heterocyclic amines, which are found in cooked meats and fish.

The Japanese scientists fed these chemicals to mice and then observed what damage they caused.

When the mice were given non-alcoholic beer to drink instead of water, the damage to their vital organs was cut by 85%.

Dr Arimoto-Kobayashi suspects compounds in the beer prevented the amines from binding to DNA.

New Scientist magazine reported: "If these compounds can be identified, brewers might be able to produce beers particularly rich in them, or they could be added to foods."

Health benefits

Heavy alcohol consumption is blamed for about 6% of all cancers in western countries.

But both beer and wine, taken in moderation, are also associated with health benefits.

In 2000 scientists in the US and Canada reported results of animal studies showing that beer may reduce the incidence of narrowed arteries and cataracts by up to 50%.

Darker beers, which are richer in antioxidants, were thought to be especially healthy.

Another study from the Czech Republic has suggested that beer provides enough folic acid - a B vitamin commonly found in fortified grains and green leafy vegetables - to lower heart disease risk.

Researchers have also found that people who consume one or two glasses of beer a day reduce their risk of Alzheimer's disease by 30%.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

