TITLE	Baby bottle danger dismissed by British experts

by ROBIN YAPP, Daily Mail

Last updated at 12:27 26 January 2005

A chemical in plastic baby bottles is a serious threat to children's health, a US expert has claimed.

Professor Frederick vom Saal said research suggests that bisphenol A - known as BPA - can cause birth defects, early puberty, hyperactivity, reduced fertility and an increased risk of cancer.

He said studies show the chemical is a danger even at doses considered safe under European regulations and called for an urgent reassessment of safety levels.

'Phenomenally potent chemical'

But he met immediate opposition from British experts who said there was no reason to stop using bottles made of polycarbonate plastic, which contain BPA and are estimated to account for more than 90 per cent of feeding bottles sold in the UK. They pointed out that Professor vom Saal made his comments at a talk staged by a company selling plastic baby bottles "guaranteed" to be free of BPA.

BPA is used in many food tins and drinks cans and studies have shown that it can accumulate in human blood and breast milk.

Under European regulations the tolerable daily intake - the maximum safe intake for any individual - is set at 10 micrograms per kilogram of body weight per day.

But Professor vom Saal, from the University of Missouri, said studies in rodents show that it can dangerously disrupt hormones at levels lower than this.

He said that as a precaution safe levels should be set 1,000 times lower than doses at which adverse effects are seen.

"This is a phenomenally potent chemical," he said. "If adverse effects seen in animals and safe alternatives are available then we should assume that this chemical is going to cause harm in humans and just get rid of the stuff."

However Bill Durodie, a senior research fellow at King's College London, said: "It's irresponsible marketing to play on parents' concerns about their children on the basis of evidence that is seriously disputed. There's a huge debate in scientific circles about whether we can extrapolate from low dose data in mice and rats to humans."

Dr Peter Weiss, of the International Children Medical Research Association in Birmingham, who was involved in drawing up the European guideline, said: "All the bottles I have tested in the UK are several thousand times lower than the European standard.

"Parents should continue with polycarbonate if that's what they are using and always buy a reputable brand."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

