TITLE	Cancer risk to children who live with a smoker

by JULIE WHELDON, Daily Mail

Last updated at 08:21 28 January 2005

Parents who smoke at home could be condemning their children to developing lung cancer in later life, a study has revealed.

Youngsters exposed to passive smoking for several hours a day are three times more likely to develop the disease as adults than children brought up in a smoke-free household, researchers said.

With half of British children growing up in homes with smokers, cancer experts last night said the research raised a 'terrifying spectre' for parents.

Doctors' leaders and anti-tobacco campaigners said the study, one of the biggest of its kind, provided powerful new evidence for a total ban on smoking in all public places.

The research, published in the British Medical Journal today, studied 123,479 people across Europe who had been exposed to passive smoking.

Based on more than 60,000 who had never smoked, scientists were able to examine the effects of second-hand smoke on children.

They found that those who were exposed to passive smoking for a limited period every day had double the risk of lung cancer in later life.

Three-fold higher risk

Children who grew up in homes where they were exposed to smoke for several hours a day had a three-fold higher risk.

Among those who had been exposed to passive smoking, but were not smokers themselves, 97 got lung cancer and 20 had upper respiratory cancers such as cancer of the larynx. Another 14 died from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease during the seven follow-up years of the study.

It was also found that former smokers were twice as likely to suffer diseases such as cancer as a result of passive smoking than non-smokers - probably because their lungs were already damaged.

Researcher Paolo Vineis, of Imperial College London, said: "The message of the study to parents is not to smoke, but if they do then not to do it in the presence of their children."

Cancer Research UK's director of tobacco studies, Professor Robert West, said: "This study raises a terrifying spectre for smoking parents.

"Exposing their children to cigarette smoke not only damages the child's airways at the time, but may lead to development of lung cancer in later life.

"As a society we recognise that non-smokers need to be protected from carcinogens when at work but we are not doing enough to protect the most vulnerable non-smokers of all - children. This has to change."

For years the tobacco industry has claimed there is no definitive proof that passive smoking is linked to lung cancer.

Passive smoking increases risk

But in October it emerged that scientific advisers had told the Government that second-hand smoke dramatically increases the risk of cancer and heart disease. Details of the report had been on Ministers' desks for six months.

Last November Health Secretary John Reid announced that smoking would be banned in all hospitals by 2006, enclosed public spaces by 2007 and all restaurants and pubs that serve food by 2008.

But doctors have said this still does not go far enough as staff in the 10 per cent of pubs that do not serve food could still be at risk from passive smoking.

A spokesman for the British Medical Association said the study showed the risks are even higher for the 12million ex-smokers in the UK than thought.

"No one should have to risk lung cancer to earn a living," she said. "Yet John Reid's proposals for a partial ban on smoking would mean some bar workers will continue to do just this."

Chris Ogden, of the Tobacco Manufacturers Association, said: "The science as a whole does not prove a causation between environmental tobacco smoke and death and disease."

He said the latest study was flawed as it was based on middle-aged adults trying to recall how much smoke they were exposed to as children.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

