TITLE	Vaccine 'will wipe out' cervical cancer

by SARAH SIMS, Daily Mail

Last updated at 11:46 01 February 2005

A highly effective vaccine that protects against most kinds of cervical cancer - and which could wipe out the disease - could be available by next year.

Researchers are working on the third phase of a trial, which involves 15,000 women worldwide and is the last step before licensing the drug for general use.

Preliminary findings of the vaccine already suggest it is 80-100 per cent effective.

An international clinical trial showed recently that the experimental vaccine protects against the two strains of human papilloma virus that are linked to 70 per cent of cervical cancers.

Scientists have already established a link between the virus and a common viral infection that is the leading cause of cancer of the cervix.

Dr Diane Harper, from the Norris Cotton Cancer Centre and Dartmouth Medical School in New Hampshire, America, who led the study, believes it may prevent all diseases associated with human papilloma virus - which is the most common sexually-transmitted viral infection - such as abnormal pap smears, and even mouth or oral cancers.

The virus, which the Association of Reproductive Health Professionals says is recognised as the only cause of cervical cancer, is not spread through sex alone but by skin-to-skin contact, and produces no symptoms.

Recommended for young women

There are about 100 strains of human papilloma virus, of which 30 are linked to cancer of the cervix.

The vaccine, manufactured by GlaxoSmithKline, protects those who are immunised for a period of between three and five years. It has no side-effects, except for pain or redness at the injection site - and experts believe it could even eradicate the disease.

"This is not an exotic disease," says Dr Harper. "If you have contact with another human being, you are at risk of an infection. This vaccine provides systemic protection.

"We're still discovering all the diseases related to this virus and which appear to be caused by it. But the vaccine offers such an advantage for women and as soon as it becomes available we will see a change in health care."

The study that Dr Harper led ran from 2000 and 2003, with 1,113 women aged 15 to 25 in the US Canada and Brazil.

In women who received all three injections and all of the follow-up tests, the vaccine was 100 per cent successful. In those who had one or two injections, the vaccine was 91 per cent.

Researchers believe more than 75 per cent of women are infected with the human papilloma virus at some time. Most cases are short-lived and resolve themselves through the body's ability to develop immunity. But a small percentage do progress to cervical cancer.

Every year around 2,500 women in Britain are diagnosed with the disease and 1,000 die. Experts believe about 70 per cent of cases are caused by the two strains of the virus that the vaccine targets.

If the vaccine is approved, it would be recommended for young women between the ages of ten and 12, with booster immunisations later.

Researchers are also examining a vaccination for men, who often unknowingly carry the virus.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

