TITLE	Potential cancer-causing dye discovered in food

Last updated at 16:48 18 February 2005

An urgent warning has been issued by the Food Standards Agency (FSA) today after a potentially cancer-causing dye was discovered in more than 350 widely-eaten food products.

The illegal dye called Sudan I was used in a batch of chilli powder used by Premier Foods to manufacture Worcester sauce, which was then used as an ingredient in a wide range of products.

The Food Standards Agency is advising people not to eat foods that have been inadvertently contaminated.

Food Standards Agency Chief Executive Dr Jon Bell said: "Sudan I could contribute to an increased risk of cancer.

"However, at the levels present the risk is likely to be very small but it is sensible to avoid eating any more. There is no risk of immediate ill health.

"We are working with the industry to ensure that any remaining affected products are speedily removed.

"Because of the widespread use of this Worcester sauce to flavour other foods, we may find further affected products. We will continue to take action to remove these and minimise the risk to consumers."

Banned in the UK

The foods, including soups, sauces and ready meals, have been distributed widely. At least 350 food products are currently known to be affected.

The companies whose products are listed are co-operating with the agency to ensure the products are withdrawn.

Sudan I is a dye that should not be added to food and is banned in the UK and across the EU. Since July 2003 all chilli powder imported into the UK has to be certified free of Sudan I.

The FSA and local authorities randomly sample more than 1,000 consignments a year of imported chilli products.

 However, this batch predates this sampling programme and was uncovered after sampling of Worcester sauce produced by Premier Foods exported to Italy.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

