TITLE	Dye alert spreads to school meals

by SEAN POULTER, Daily Mail

Last updated at 16:10 23 February 2005

Schools, hospitals, restaurants and hotels have been dragged into the food contamination alert involving a cancer-causing dye.

Major wholesalers and suppliers such as Booker, Brakes, 3663 and Makro are all understood to have used Worcester sauce contaminated with the illegal dye Sudan 1.

The sauce, flavoured with chilli containing the banned additive, will have been used in pies, sauces and dressings used in millions of meals eaten by schoolchildren.

The disturbing development emerged as the number of products withdrawn from sale increased by eight to 427.

Up to now, the food recall has focused on the recall of ready meals and other products sold by leading supermarkets, such as Tesco, Sainsbury's, Asda and Morrisons/Safeway.

It was also known that Whitbread restaurants, Pizza Hut and McDonald's have had to change their recipes. However, it is now clear that the contamination alert has spread even further than first feared.

Contamination spread to catering outlets

Bob Cotton, of the British Hospitality Association, said: "There are a huge range of sauces and ingredients used by catering outlets on a day-to-day basis which are caught up in this contamination. It goes much further than supermarket ready meals."

A Department of Health spokesperson said: "There is no one supplier of hospital food. Individual hospital trusts make their own arrangements with suppliers, and the Food Standards Agency advice is for hospital trusts to contact their local suppliers for more information."

It was claimed that 'shocking blunders' led to the scandal. In 2003, the Government's Food Standards Agency investigated the firm of spice importers now responsible for the UK's biggest food recall.

However, it appears to have 'missed' a five-ton consignment of suspect chilli powder contaminated with Sudan 1, which is commonly used to colour shoe polish and has been banned for food use since 1995.

The chilli was subsequently used to make the Worcester sauce which has now contaminated so many products.

Concerns about the safety of chilli imported from India first emerged the summer of 2003. At that stage a number of curry pastes and sauces were removed from sale after they were found to contain the illegal ingredient.

The main supplier of the contaminated chilli was found to be East Anglian Food Ingredients (EAFI). A team from the FSA went there in an effort to trace the source of the contaminated chilli and take it out of the food chain.

Second compensation bill

However, the watchdog's officials did not identify and trace a five-ton batch which had been supplied, via a middle-man, to the ready-meal giant Premier Foods.

EAFI was forced to pay &pound;360,000 compensation to food manufacturers in 2003 following the first contamination episode. The firm now faces a second massive compensation bill with the cost of the latest food alert put at a staggering &pound;100million.

In a statement last night, EAFI said it had no information about the source of the contamination. But it confirmed it had supplied chilli powder to the Essex-based seasoning company Unbar Rothon in 2002.

"Unbar Rothon has informed EAFI that it has recently carried out tests on a batch of EAFI chilli powder supplied in September 2002, prior to the 2003 recall, and that these tests have confirmed the presence of Sudan 1." All the evidence suggests the current crisis could have been avoided if the FSA had traced all the suspect chilli in 2003.

Premier used the ingredient to flavour its Crosse  and  Blackwell Worcester sauce which was then used in hundreds of products.

The most recent items added to the list of banned foods are Sainsbury's Ultimate Pork Sausages in a 400g pack and at the meat counter, and the following ready meals: Sainsbury's Ultimate Pork Sausages  and  Mash 500g; Tesco frozen Chicken  and  Vegetable Casserole 400g; GW Padley's Chicken Wings of Fire; Northern Foods' Rover's Return Lamb Hot Pot; Oak Farm Foods' Steak  and  Kidney Pie; and Shippams frozen Value Chicken Casserole.

'Shocking blunders'

The Conservative Shadow Food and Farming Secretary, Tim Yeo, wrote to his opposite number, Margaret Beckett, and the big supermarkets calling on them to tighten food safety procedures.

He condemned the FSA's failure to get to grips with the chilli contamination two years ago. "This is incompetence approaching negligence," he said. "We are looking at shocking blunders here. It is time the FSA stopped lecturing people about diet and got on with the real job, which is food safety."

Turning to the supermarkets, Mr Yeo said: "There is a duty on these companies to make sure the products they supply are safe.

"They have enormous resources and power and should be financing safety tests to protect their customers."

Although the FSA insists that the health risk from Sudan 1 in the levels found in the banned foods is extremely low, it faces accusations that it delayed telling the public about the contamination of foods found in virtually every home in the country. The watchdog was informed by Premier Foods on February 7, it told supermarkets on February 15, but the public were not warned until February 18.

Food industry insiders claim that powerful supermarkets might have leaned on the FSA to delay going public.

One said: "Supermarkets were telling their suppliers that they wanted to have replacement products on their shelves before the public was told."

A spokesman for the FSA said yesterday: "East Anglia Food Ingredients provided a list of customers they sold chilli powder to during our 2003 investigation. We chased up all of those customers and contacted the relevant local authorities where they are based."

He said the onus was on all food companies, including Premier Foods, to ensure that the food they were selling was safe.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

