TITLE	Danger foods: How many more are there?

by Mail online

Last updated at 17:21 24 February 2005

The deadline has passed for food companies to identify products that may have been contaminated with cancer causing dye Sudan 1.

The Food Standards Agency (FSA) is still compiling the final list of danger products, raising the possibility that dozens more products could be affected.

But even when the full list is completed tonight, the FSA has admitted that retailers will not be given a final deadline to remove the potentially lethal products from their shelves. Instead, it will be left to over-stretched local authorities to police the recall.

A spokeswoman for the FSA told Mail online: "Some supermarkets are more affected than others so we have not set a deadline for shops on when the products need to be removed from their shelves.

"We have advised the products are removed as soon as possible, but if shops are still selling affected products at the weekend it will be up to the local authorities to make a decision on individual cases whether to prosecute."

New products added

Two more products have been recalled as part of the cancer dye alert today.

More than 400 products have been affected so far after they were found to contain the banned Sudan 1, which has been linked to an increased risk of cancer.

Premier Foods announced the latest additions to the list. They are Branston's Hot and Spicy Sweet Pickle and Rich and Fruity Sauce. The company said they were retail products, and not supplied to food ingredients customers, adding: "We are recalling these products at once as a precautionary measure. No other Branston products are affected by this recall."

Local authorities are also checking that potentially-affected foods supplied to schools and hospitals by two catering companies are being withdrawn.

The caterers, 3663 and Brakes, which also hold major contracts with pubs and restaurants, have recalled all potentially-contaminated items.

No immediate risk to health

The alert was sparked when a consignment of Crosse and Blackwell Worcester Sauce, made by Premier Foods, was found to contain chilli powder contaminated with the banned Sudan 1 dye.

Sudan 1 is normally used as a colouring in solvents, oils, waxes, petrol, and shoe and floor polish.

Experts warn it could contribute to an increased risk of cancer, although they add there is unlikely to be an immediate risk to health.

A spokesman for the FSA said local authorities were checking that potentially-affected products were being withdrawn.

"Some affected Worcester sauce produced by Premier Foods may have been used in the catering sector," he said. "Premier Foods are responsible for ensuring these products are withdrawn.

"The risk is very small. Local authorities are routinely asked to inform and check that food businesses - including the catering departments of schools and hospitals - are withdrawing affected products."

Premier Foods insisted it was doing all it could to resolve the problem. A spokeswoman said: "Premier Foods are taking the matter incredibly seriously and they are investigating all factors but they are not making any further comment at the moment."

The Department of Health said it was not possible to pinpoint hospital food to a particular catering company.

"There is no one supplier of hospital food," a spokesman said. "Individual hospital trusts make their own arrangements with suppliers, and the FSA advice is for hospital trusts to contact their local suppliers for more information.

"Many hospital trusts buy their food using suppliers identified through the NHS Purchasing and Supply Agency (PASA)."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

