TITLE	Teenage lives 'at risk from sunbeds'

Last updated at 13:13 18 March 2005

Britain is facing an epidemic of skin cancer in 10 years unless teenagers are banned from using sunbeds, experts warn.

More than 7,000 Britons contracted the disease last year - up nearly 25 per cent on 10 years ago - and the cancer, also known as malignant melanoma, is the third most common one among young people.

Experts say exposure to damaging ultraviolet rays when under 18 increases the risk.

They hope to warn the thousands of Britons who will visit a tanning salon at least once before going on holiday this summer.

Mike Repacholi, a radiation-expert at the World Health Organisation, said: "People think they can protect themselves by getting a base tan before they go on holiday, so they don't get sunburned when they are there.

"This is a myth - it does not provide adequate protection at all. There is concern that teenagers, in particular, use sunbeds excessively.

"Tans are seen as socially desirable - but we don't want a skin cancer epidemic ten years from now."

Unregulated

Around 132,000 malignant melanoma cases are diagnosed each year worldwide, and there are 66,000 deaths. In Britain, it kills about 1,700 people and is the third most common cancer for 15 to 39 year olds, with 1,200 new cases a year.

Sam Broadbent, who was diagnosed three years ago at 29, blames regular sunbed use when she was a teenager.

The mother-of-two said last night: "There were no health warnings, no regulation and no one told me that, with pale skin and freckles, I should use it only for the minimum time."

The tanning industry is unregulated by the Government but has a trade body, the Sunbed Association, which represents a quarter of UK operators.

It said: "Our members must adhere to a code of practice which says no one under 16 is allowed to use a bed, even with parental consent."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

