TITLE	Skin cancer 'to treble in 30 years'

Last updated at 12:31 23 March 2005

Rates of deadly skin cancer will treble in the next 30 years if current trends in reckless sunbathing are not changed, experts warn.

Children are three times more likely than their grandparents to develop malignant melanoma as the sun-worshipping culture shows no signs of abating, according to campaigners.

And even if people do take notice of sun safety campaigns, incidence rates are still set to double in 30 years because of the amount of sun exposure people have had already.

The warnings came as Cancer Research UK launched this year's SunSmart campaign to encourage people to take precautions to protect themselves against the sun's harmful rays.

Prof Brian Diffey, from Newcastle General Hospital, said his research into future trends in skin cancer showed it would take many years before rates started to level off and drop.

He said that the public awareness campaigns, urging people to avoid too much sun, wear sunscreen and protect children, would help decrease the number of skin cancers in the long-term.

But the expert added: "The thing about skin cancer is that we won't see a slow down next year or the year after. It may be 20 or 30 years before we can see the benefits of these campaigns."

Rising faster

There are more than 7,300 cases of malignant melanoma - the deadliest form of skin cancer - diagnosed in the UK each year, with 1,700 deaths annually.

Rates of malignant melanoma are rising faster than any other type of cancer.

Prof Diffey said while cases were still more common in over-50s, the disease was attacking younger people more often as each decade passed.

Men and women born in 1970, who are now in their mid-30s, are being diagnosed with melanoma at the same rate as people who were born in 1930 and did not develop melanoma until their 50s. It is also the second most common cancer in those aged 15 to 34.

Prof Diffey said an increase in overseas holidays and global warming were major contributors to rising rates of skin cancer.

He said he believed that increased use of sunbeds was still only a minor contributory factor.

Last year Prof Diffey's research estimated that sunbed use probably kills about 100 people a year - accounting for around eight per cent of malignant melanoma mortality.

Sunbed ban for under 16s

He said exposure to the sun was still the most important factor in skin cancer risk. But Sara Hiom, CRUK head of health information, said the charity would like to see an end to sunbed use among under-16s.

"We would like to see more of a response in terms of regulation from the industry. It is very difficult to get Government regulations about sunbeds," she said.

Until the impact of campaigns in preventing new cases of skin cancer is felt, Prof Diffey said that early detection was the key to bringing down mortality rates.

"It is essential that people monitor their moles and skin blemishes and report any changes in them.

"Acting promptly can save lives and early detection and treatment will give many melanoma patients an excellent prognosis," he said.

Dr Catherine Harwood, a CRUK dermatologist, added: "Signs to watch out for include a mole getting bigger, a mole with a ragged outline or one with a mixture of different shades of brown and black.

"If a mole gets inflamed or starts to bleed or itch, then get it checked out."

Lifestyle changes

This year's SunSmart campaign is focusing particularly on 16 to 24-year-olds, warning them that sunburn can double their risk of skin cancer.

Prof Robert Souhami, director of policy at CRUK, said: "We know that half of all cases of cancer can be prevented by making lifestyle changes.

"We're seeing more and more people giving up smoking to lessen their chances of getting a whole range of cancers.

"Reducing the risk of skin cancer is something most of us can do by following the SunSmart code."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

