TITLE	Nuts lower cancer risk for babies later in life

Last updated at 14:47 20 April 2005

Women who eat foods such as fish and nuts during pregnancy may reduce the risk of their daughters developing breast cancer in later life, research suggested today.

US researchers said that mothers who ate foods rich in omega-3 fatty acids during pregnancy and while nursing, and then fed their babies such a diet after weaning could cut the danger of future breast cancer in the youngsters.

In contrast, women who eat omega-6 fats - common in Western diets including high levels of meat, eggs and vegetable oils - could be increasing their daughters' risk of breast cancer.

Dr Elaine Hardman, from Louisiana State University, said diet mattered for mothers-to-be.

"Inadvertently, we may be setting up our daughters to develop breast cancer 50 years from now," she said.

Both omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids are essential for human health, but particularly in the Western hemisphere omega-6 far exceeds omega-3 in the typical diet.

Foods which contain omega-6 fatty acids include meat, eggs, poultry, cereals, breads, most vegetable oils and margarine.

Omega-3 fatty acids are most common in fish, especially cold-water fish like tuna, salmon and mackerel, as well as in flaxseed oils, soya beans and nuts.

Maternal diet

Dr Hardman based her theory on research showing that maternal diets high in omega-6 fatty acids increase maternal oestrogen levels.

Increased oestrogen has, in turn, been linked to an increased incidence of breast cancer in female offspring.

But many foods rich in omega-3 fatty acids are known to block the effects of oestrogen and boost immunity.

The researcher used mice bred with a genetic predisposition to develop breast cancer, looking at rates of cancer depending on whether the diet of the mother and offspring after birth was high in omega-6 or omega-3 acids.

All the mice exposed only to omega-6 in the womb, during nursing and after weaning developed tumours by the age of six months.

But less than 60 per cent of the offspring who were exposed to high levels of omega-3 either maternally or after weaning formed tumours by eight months of age.

Those exposed to omega-3 both maternally and after weaning had a tumour incidence rate of just 13 per cent.

Dr Hardman, presenting the research at the annual meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research, said suppression of tumour growth had been seen with as little as 2 per cent omega-3 fatty acids in the diet.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

