TITLE	Cancer risk of popular HRT drug

Last updated at 11:40 29 April 2005

Fears have been raised over the safety of Britain's most popular hormone replacement therapy.

Researchers found that the synthetic HRT pill Livial doubled the risk of womb cancer compared with conventional treatments containing a combination of hormones.

But the discovery faces women with a dilemma. For previous studies have shown that combination HRT poses a much greater breast cancer risk than Livial.

When breast and womb cancer rates are looked at together, the overall risk is higher for women taking the combined hormone treatment.

The findings might also prompt a re-think about the use of oestrogen-only forms of HRT.

The makers of Livial, the Dutch pharmaceutical company Organon, is now in talks with UK regulators about what advice to give patients and doctors.

A decision will later be made in agreement with the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) on any changes to be introduced in light of the new evidence.

Organon is currently running an international trial on the effects of Livial on the womb involving more than 3,000 women. The first results are expected towards the end of this year.

Popular brand

Livial has become the most popular brand of HRT among post-menopausal women in the UK following earlier health fears about the effects of conventional treatments.

The new findings emerge from the Million Women Study, led by scientists from Cancer Research UK and Oxford University, which earlier highlighted the raised breast cancer associated with HRT.

The study, published in The Lancet medical journal, found that six women out of every 1,000 taking Livial developed cancer of the womb over a five year period.

This compared with between two and three women per 1,000 for those taking the combination treatment - about the same cancer rate seen in women who have never taken HRT.

An increased risk of womb cancer was also observed in the small percentage of women who have not undergone hysterectomies yet who take an oestrogen-only HRT treatment.

The link between womb cancer and oestrogen-only HRT is already well known. For this reason, oestrogen-only treatments are normally reserved for women who have had their wombs removed.

Study leader Professor Valerie Beral, director of Cancer Research UK's Epidemiology Unit said:

Increased risk

"These new results create a dilemma for women who haven't had a hysterectomy and want to use HRT. On the one hand, oestrogen-only HRT and tibolone increase the risk of endometrial cancer, but on the other hand, HRT containing both oestrogen and progesterone causes the greatest increase in breast cancer.

"Since breast cancer is much more common than endometrial cancer, combined HRT poses the greatest overall cancer risk."

There are about 5,100 new cases of womb cancer diagnosed in the UK each year, compared with 41,000 cases of breast cancer.

At the start of the Million Women Study, 9 per cent of the women recruited who had not had a hysterectomy and were using HRT took Livial. Now the figure is about 15 per cent, while the use of combined and oestrogen-only HRT has fallen.

It is not clear how many women in the UK are on HRT. According to Department of Health figures, almost four million prescriptions were issued in England for all forms of HRT last year. Of these, 344,000 were for Livial - about 9 per cent of the total.

Karen Winterhalter, executive director of the charity Women's Health Concern, said: "Our message to women is don't panic. Understand what kind of HRT you are on, don't come off your HRT, but if you are worried then go and talk to your doctor."

No change

Ms Winterhalter said she did not expect any change of policy on prescribing oestrogen-only HRT.

"We don't think this would be likely, or advisable," she said. "If women with wombs were to take oestrogen-only HRT, they would suffer very erratic bleeding which would cancel out any benefit."

Professor Gordon Duff, chairman of the Committee on the Safety of Medicines, which advises the Government on medicine safety, said: "This latest data re-inforces our previous advice that it is essential to consider all the risks and benefits when deciding HRT treatment for an individual woman.

"There is no need for any immediate action by women taking HRT, but they should discuss their need for treatment with their prescriber at their next review."

Women with questions about HRT can contact the Women's Health Concern helpline on 0845 1232319 or e-mail counselling@womens-health-concern.org.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

