TITLE	Paprika withdrawn after cancer scare

Last updated at 12:14 30 April 2005

A potentially cancer-causing dye - similar to the notorious Sudan 1 - has been discovered in jars of paprika, sparking a major product recall.

Bart Spices Ltd has withdrawn all its ground paprika jars sold in the UK, including those sold under the Co-op supermarket label, after traces of the chemical dye Para Red were found.

The spice has been pulled from supermarkets such as Waitrose and Somerfield, while Tesco has recalled all its own-brand BBQ rice cakes, when they were also discovered to contain the dye as well as the illegal dye Sudan 1.

The alert echoes February's major scare, when Sudan 1 was discovered in hundreds of food products which had used a batch of contaminated Worcester Sauce.

Scientists from the Food Standards Agency have concluded that "it would be prudent to assume that Para Red could be a genotoxic carcinogen".

The concern over Para Red was first realised on April 21, when the FSA announced that some of the seasoning in Old El Paso Dinner Kits contained the illegal dye.

Bart Spices realised it was using the same supplier for their ground paprika and a sample test showed a trace of Para Red in their stock - 1.5mg/kg.

A spokesman for the company said: "As a company committed to supplying only the very finest quality food ingredients, we took the immediate decision to withdraw our ground paprika spice from all outlets selling the product and advertised a product recall in the national press."

The affected products are Bart Paprika, 48g (glass jar) - Batch Code 5032 Best Before End Dec 2007 and Batch Code 5089 Best Before End Dec 2007.

The other recall is Co-op Paprika, 46g (glass jar) - Batch Code 5075 Best Before End Feb 2007.

The spokesman insisted no other batch number had been affected and said those returning the product would receive a full refund.

Para Red is a chemical dye, banned under the Colours in Food Regulations 1995, which scientists believe could be carcinogenic, although the risk is small.

"According to the FSA, at the levels found any risk is likely to be very small but it is sensible not to eat a product containing the dye," the spokesman said.

Bart Spices said it was carrying out a thorough investigation to establish when the dye entered the supply chain.

Tesco has recalled all its own-brand 130g BBQ rice cakes, which are best before November and December 2005. No other Tesco products are thought to be affected.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

