TITLE	Cancer checks on spices after new food dyes alert

By SEAN POULTER, Daiy Mail

Last updated at 10:15 04 May 2005

Watchdogs are to test imported spices for the presence of cancer-risk dyes amid evidence of a massive food scandal.

The Food Standards Agency will target chilli, paprika, turmeric and cayenne pepper over fears that "greedy" foreign producers are colouring spices to boost prices and profits.

Earlier this year, thousands of processed foods and ready meals were removed from sale in a recall costing &pound;100million following the discovery of contamination with Sudan 1.

Other big brands, such as Bart Spices paprika, have been withdrawn in recent days following the discovering of the illegal dye Para Red.

There are concerns that other harmful dyes, such as Orange II and Rhodamine B, are being used by foreign spice merchants.

Most of the dyes involved have an industrial use to colour textiles, shoe polish, plastics and other materials.

The spices under suspicion are a huge part of the British diet because of the surge in the popularity of Indian, Chinese, Thai and Mediterranean dishes.

The food industry was unaware that illegal dyes such as Sudan 1 and Para Red were being added to spices until relatively recently.

Supermarkets and their suppliers are currently frantically carrying out tests on their spices to establish whether these are contaminated.

Now the FSA is planning its own formal survey and spot checks. The Government watchdog is working with the European Commission and a surveillance programme.

Small risk

The FSA have said: "Two dyes, Sudan 1 and Para Red, have been found in foods in this country and in Europe. The risk is very small but they are illegal and avoidable.

"The agency has told the food industry that they need to ensure that the foods they sell are legal and they should take action to ensure that the foods they produce and sell are not contaminated.

"The agency is considering a survey of chilli powder and related products to assess whether imports into the UK are contaminated with illegal dyes."

Food crisis expert Tony Hines, of Leatherhead Food International, said the financial incentives to dress up spices with illegal, and potentially harmful, colours are huge.

"It is said that $50 of illegal food dye can increase the price of a $500 batch of spices to $1,200," he said. "There are big profits to be made from such scams.

"When you go to B and Q to buy paint you get a colour chart. We are seeing something similar with spices.

"The market takes a view that something like paprika or chilli has an ideal colour and that it is only possible to get the best price if it is a perfect match.

"It seems that some people are deciding to use artificial means to achieve the perfect colour."

Some spice producers in countries as far apart as India, Vietnam and Spain have been found to be using illegal dyes.

The practice is thought to have spread to many other countries as producers strive to meet the beauty pageant colour standards demanded by supermarkets and manufacturers.

Making money

British Pepper  and  Spice Ltd, which serves most of the major supermarkets with paprika and similar products, is testing its own supplies.

Managing director Ian James said he was confident of a clean bill of health.

He added: "Clearly someone has done something they shouldn't be doing. It is being done by people to make money, because the redder their paprika looks the more money they can get.

"The spice industry has a very wide spectrum of suppliers. There are some greedy individuals in the business."

The suspect paprika at the centre of the contamination with Para Red was imported from a Spanish supplier, Ramon Sabater, based in Murcia.

It supplied Bart Spices in the UK, which sold the paprika under its own name and to the Co-op as an own-label product.

Sabater also sold tainted paprika to the makers of the popular Old El Paso burrito and enchilada dinner kits. All have been withdrawn.

Separately, Tesco has removed barbecue flavour rice cakes that used paprika from central Asia. This was contaminated with both Para Red and Sudan 1.

Bart's chairman, Edward Shaw, said the company's tests on other batches of paprika for evidence of Para Red have proved negative.

It is producing new batches from clean sources in the next few days.

Sabater refused to respond to enquiries about the scale of the contamination.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

