TITLE	A fruitful campaign

Last updated at 12:33 05 May 2005

Three-quarters of people in the UK do not eat the recommended five portions of fruit and vegetables a day, research revealed today.

Cancer Research UK said that two-thirds of people were also unaware of the link between low fruit and vegetable intake and cancer.

The charity has now launched its Fiver Day campaign to show how a family of five can eat five portions of fruit and veg each on a budget of &pound;5 a day.

The poll of 4,000 people found that women were better than men at eating their five a day, with good habits increasing with age. Fewer than 20 per cent of those aged 15 to 24 ate the recommended daily allowance of fruit and vegetables, compared with 33 per cent of those over 55.

Fiver Day - launched on 05/05/05 - is part of Cancer Research UK's Reduce the Risk campaign, which aims to raise awareness of how lifestyle changes can lessen the chances of being diagnosed with cancer.

Dieticians at the charity have developed easy budget recipes, such as home-made pizza, stir-fry and vegetable curry to encourage people to eat more healthily.

They have also come up with tips on how to eat five a day, including budget shopping guides showing it is cheaper to snack on healthy foods than on biscuits and crisps.

Dr Lesley Walker, director of cancer information at Cancer Research UK, said: "The results of this survey are very worrying and clearly show that a lot of people are still not eating the recommended five portions of fruit and vegetables a day.

"One of the best ways to improve your overall health is by improving your diet.

"At least half of all cancers are preventable and by taking simple steps such as following the Fiver Day guidelines we can help reduce our risk."

All the recipes and advice are available by visiting www.reducetherisk.org.uk.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

