TITLE	More cancer-dye spice found in food products

Last updated at 10:45 10 May 2005

Another 19 food products are being withdrawn from sale because they contain spices contaminated with an illegal dye, the Food Standards Agency have said.

It brings the total number of goods thought to contain Para Red to 66.

The latest raft of foods being withdrawn includes products made by Pataks, Tesco and Asda.

Para Red is a potentially cancer-causing industrial dye similar to Sudan 1.

It was found in cayenne pepper supplied by Spanish company Ramon Sabater and imported into the UK by Lion Foods.

According to the Food Standards Agency, the recalled goods contain spices made with low amounts of Para Red.

"At the levels found, the risk from eating any of these foods is very small, but as a precaution it would be sensible not to eat them," the FSA said in a statement.

The figure is six times more than was previously known to have been sold to British food manufacturers.

Consumer groups said it is vital that worried customers are given information as quickly as possible about which other products are contaminated.

Customers who have any of the affected products at home should contact the relevant store or manufacturer for a refund, the FSA said.

The first batch of 35 affected products was announced by the FSA on May 5. Another 12 goods were recalled the following day.

An FSA spokesman tonight said that contaminated spices could be found in still more products.

"As yet we don't know because products are still being tested," he said.

Shoppers are advised to look out for in-store notices and other publicity about affected products.

Para Red first sparked concerns on April 21 when the FSA ordered a recall of Old El Paso dinner kits thought to contain contaminated seasoning. Traces of the dye were later found in Bart Spices Ltd's ground paprika.

The company withdrew all its ground paprika jars from sale in the UK, including those sold under the Co-op supermarket label.

At that time, Tesco recalled some of its own-brand 130g BBQ rice cakes which were thought to be affected.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

