TITLE	Exercise to limit prostate cancer

Last updated at 11:20 10 May 2005

Vigorous exercise could slow the progression of prostate cancer in older men and help keep them alive, new research suggests today.

Scientists in the United States looked for links between physical activity and prostate cancer in 47,620 male health professionals who were monitored over 14 years.

Participants were asked to report how much time they spent engaging in a variety of activities and sports including walking, running, swimming, playing tennis, cycling and callisthenics.

During the research period 2,892 new cases of prostate cancer were diagnosed among the study group, including 482 advanced cases.

The researchers, led by Dr Edward Giovannucci, from the Harvard School of Public Health in Boston, found a much lower risk of advanced and fatal cases of cancer in men aged 65 and older who engaged in the most vigorous physical activity.

Their risk of having a high-grade disease, or dying of prostate cancer, was reduced by almost 70 per cent.

The scientists wrote in the journal Archives of Internal Medicine: "In conclusion, men 65 years or older engaging at least three hours of vigorous physical activity weekly had a markedly lower risk of being diagnosed as having high-grade, advanced, or fatal prostate cancer.

"Although the mechanisms still need to be understood, these findings suggest that vigorous activity could slow the progression of prostate cancer and might be recommended to reduce mortality from prostate cancer, particularly given the many other documented benefits of exercise."

Previous studies have suggested that more physically active men may have a lower risk of prostate cancer, but the link has not been clear.

About 30,000 men are diagnosed with prostate cancer each year in the UK, a third of whom will die of the disease.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

