TITLE	Britons in the dark over sun risk index

Last updated at 12:06 23 May 2005

Britons are missing out on vital weather information which could protect their skin and reduce the risk of cancer, experts warned today.

The UV Index - which frequently appears on TV weather forecasts and websites - helps give an idea of how strong the sun's ultra violet rays will be during the day.

But a survey by Cancer Research UK found that 70 per cent of 1,000 people polled did not know what it was, increasing their risk of staying out in the sun longer than is safe for their skin type.

The warning came at the start of Sun Awareness Week, with campaigners hoping to highlight the importance of knowing your skin type to protect yourself from burning in the sun.

Around 60,000 new cases of non-melanoma skin cancer are diagnosed every year in the UK, which are nearly always curable if caught early.

There are 7,000 new cases of the more serious malignant melanoma annually.

In total around 1,600 people still die each year due to skin cancer.

The UV Index was developed by the World Health Organisation as a way of describing the maximum strength of the UV radiation from the sun for a particular day.

Sunburn risk

Experts say it is a more accurate indication of the potential for sunburn than estimates of temperature.

The UV Index ranges from the lowest score of one up to the highest of 20.

But it is rare for the index to go above eight in the UK, with the upper limit used in UK forecasts tending to be 10.

People who have fair skin need to protect themselves from burning between 11am and 3pm on days with a UV Index rating around two or three and higher.

Those with darker skin types are advised to cover up when the rating gets higher.

But despite this 73 per cent of people with fair skin - who are most at risk of sunburn and skin cancer - admitted that they still get sun burnt despite their own concerns for their health.

Cancer Research and Boots have produced a celebrity guide to allow people to compare their skin type and link it to the UV Index:

Very fair skin, burns easily. Renee Zellweger, Kelly Osbourne, Ewan McGregor, Prince Harry. Should cover up in the summer 11am-3pm with UV Index 2-3 and higher.

Fair but tans. Jennifer Aniston, Victoria Beckham, Brad Pitt, Tom Cruise. Should cover up UV Index 3 and higher.

Olive or brown. Jennifer Lopez, Penelope Cruz, Amir Khan. Should cover up UV Index 5 and higher.

Black. Naomi Campbell, Will Smith, Denzel Washington. Should cover up UV Index 6 and higher. Meanwhile the British Skin Foundation (BSF) has warned that sun exposure is not only dangerous but is also a major cause of premature ageing. BSF spokeswoman Dr Tamara Griffiths said: "The damage done is cumulative and for most part irreversible.

More information on protecting yourself in the sun is available at www.sunsmart.org.uk

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

