TITLE	Exposure to sun could be healthly

Last updated at 17:23 26 May 2005

Mad dogs and Englishmen go out in the midday sun - and scientists now say this is good for them.

A team from the University of Manchester, working with experts at the Norwegian Institute for Air Research, said catching some sun at midday, without wearing sunscreen, could benefit health.

The research supports claims that exposing unprotected skin to the sun for short periods helps the body produce vitamin D.

Vitamin D promotes the absorption of calcium and phosphate from food, and is essential in the formation of bones and teeth.

Vitamin D deficiency leads to bones failing to grow and causes rickets in children and osteoporosis in adults.

Some research has also suggested the vitamin can reduce the risks of colon, breast and prostate cancer.

Ultra-violet radiation expert Ann Webb has now produced new figures which predict the best time to expose unprotected skin to the sun to maximise vitamin D production.

Maximise vitamin D production

She has also estimated how long people should spend in the sun, depending on where they are.

Dr Webb calculated that 10 to 15 minutes at noon is the optimum time for the average person in the UK to spend in the sun without using sunscreen.

"Our calculations have found that the best time to be out in the sun if you want to maximise vitamin D production and its benefits is midday," she said.

"This is when the sun is highest in the sky and this is when there is more UVB radiation in the spectrum which triggers vitamin D production in the skin."

The researchers calculated the following timings for vitamin D sun exposure this Bank Holiday weekend:

Edinburgh - 11 minutes

Manchester, Leeds, Liverpool - 10 minutes

London - 9 minutes

Devon and Cornwall - 9 minutes

These figures are based on full sun exposure at midday on Bank Holiday Monday with a cloudless sky for a fair-skinned person wearing T-shirt and shorts or skirt.

People who tan easily would need to spend slightly longer in the sun, and naturally pigmented people require even more sun exposure, the researchers said.

The research uses computer simulations based on global UV data to calculate optimum times for vitamin D production based on season, time and latitude.

Computer simulations

The programme can be run for any time of day and can calculate the best exposure times at different locations.

Dr Webb said: "The two sources of vitamin D are through your skin or through foods like sardines, but because our everyday diet isn't very rich in the vitamin, it is essential that we get it from the sun.

"You do not need to sunbathe to get your vitamin D and we are not advocating people do not protect themselves with sunscreen, but if you put sunscreen on before you step out of the house, you will not reap any health benefits provided naturally by the sun.

"After a short period of unprotected exposure, you should cover up or put on sunscreen to avoid sunburn."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

