TITLE	Cancer risk 'up to 70pc higher' near power lines

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Last updated at 14:25 09 June 2005

Children living near high-voltage power lines could be at higher risk of leukaemia, warn researchers today.

The risk could be 70 per cent higher for those living within 200 metres (656ft) of overhead cables, according to a officially-backed study.

For those living 200 to 600 metres away, the risk was 20 per cent higher. Further away, there was no extra danger. Around 500 children under 15 are diagnosed with leukaemia, or cancer of the blood, every year in the UK and around 100 die from it.

Researchers measured the distance from children's home addresses at birth to the nearest high-voltage power line.

They concluded about five of the 400-420 cases of childhood leukaemia diagnosed yearly in England and Wales could be linked to power lines.

Around 2.5million people live in at-risk zones near the country's 7,000kms (4,400 miles) of lines.

A team from Oxford University's Childhood Cancer Research Group examined 29,000 cases of child cancer, including 9,700 with leukaemia, born from 1962 to 1995.

They found 64 leukaemia sufferers lived within 200 metres of power lines, while 258 lived 200 to 600 metres away.

'Significant'

Study leaders Dr Gerald Draper and Dr John Swanson, a scientific adviser at National Grid Transco, compared their results with healthy youngsters in England and Wales living in similar locations.

Dr Draper said the results were being published as they were statistically significant.

However, he added: "It may not be the effect of power lines at all.

"It may be something to do with the kind of areas where power lines are located or the sort of people who live in these areas. We will be looking at that further."

There was no reason, added Dr Draper, for parents living near power lines to move based on his findings.

But they could find out local levels of magnetic field exposure via National Grid testing. The findings, published in the British Medical Journal, are likely to alarm and confuse families.

There have been conflicting results from research over the last 25 years into possible links between electromagnetic fields and childhood cancer. Only last month, an eminent research group claimed there was no extra risk of childhood cancer from overhead lines.

'Case for immediate action'

But Eddie O'Gorman, chairman of the charity Children with Leukaemia, said the risk was ten times higher than found in previous studies.

"We have to do everything we can to protect young lives: there is a clear case for immediate action," he said.

"Controls must be introduced to stop houses and schools being built close to high-voltage power lines."

Professor John Toy, Cancer Research UK's medical director, advised parents who live or have lived near power lines not to panic.

"There may be other more common factors that contribute to the apparent increased risk," he said.

"The triggers for childhood leukaemia are most likely random events over which a parent has no control."

A spokesman for the Department of Health, which funded the study, said a panel was set up last year to examine the problem of electromagnetic fields.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

