TITLE	No link between power stations and cancer

Last updated at 15:39 10 June 2005

There is no evidence that children living near nuclear power stations in Britain are at greater risk of cancer, according to a report out today.

In its 10th report on the issue, the Committee on Medical Aspects of Radiation in the Environment (COMARE) concluded that it did not find excess numbers of childhood cancers within 25km of any nuclear power station.

The report did find an increased number of some types of childhood cancer near other nuclear installations - such as those manufacturing nuclear weapons, reprocessing waste or research units.

But these were similar results as found in past studies showing slight increases in cancers near some sites, although are there no clear evidence of a causal link.

The large study included over 32,000 cases of childhood cancer diagnosed in Britain between 1969 and 1993.

The COMARE team found a larger number of cases of leukaemia and non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) near Burghfield in Berkshire, Dounreay in Caithness and Sellafield in Cumbria.

Dounreay in particular saw more than double the number of cases of the cancers than would have been expected.

Infectious diseases increase risk

But Professor Bryn Bridges, chairman of COMARE when the report was put together, said this blip may be down to population mixing - causing exposure to infectious diseases which may increase the risk of these cancers.

Figures reveal that the area of Berkshire and South Oxfordshire where these three sites are based has traditionally had higher cancer rates for reasons that remain unclear.

But Prof Bridges said that the actual level of nuclear discharge around these sites, whose areas overlap, was 200,000 lower than was seen at Sellafield during its peak of high emissions in the 1970s.

"The view of the committee is that the significant effects seen are the result of the raised rates in Berkshire and South Oxfordshire," he added.

Prof Bridges said one result did differ from those previously published and this involved the site at Rosyth in Scotland.

The researchers found that the overall incidence of leukaemia and NHL within 25km of the site was close to the expected value.

But there was evidence of increasing risk when looking at differing distances from Rosyth.

'Unambiguous' results

The researchers said it was not yet possible to say whether living near Rosyth genuinely held a higher risk of leukaemia and NHL and more research was already underway.

They said this higher rate may be a reflection of the previously reported high incidence of central nervous system tumours in the surrounding Fife and Lothian region.

But Prof Bridges said the results for power stations were "unambiguous".

"There is no evidence from this very large study that living within 25km of a nuclear generating station in British is associated with any increased risk of childhood cancer," he said.

"Of course whether those on the anti-nuclear lobby would agree with that I don't know."

The Department of Health welcomed the report, saying it added to scientific knowledge on childhood cancer.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

