TITLE	Can NHS afford wonder cancer drug?

Last updated at 09:07 28 June 2005

A breast cancer drug that dramatically reduces the risk of relapse after surgery could soon be offered to thousands more patients in the UK.

Until now, anastrozole has only been available on the NHS to a restricted number of women with specific health problems.

But today a new licence from medicine regulators made it possible to give the drug to all post-menopausal women found to have early hormone-sensitive breast cancer after surgery.

It means that many thousands more women are now eligible for the drug, which is said to be 26 per cent more effective than the "gold standard" treatment tamoxifen.

However, its availability may be delayed by the fact that it costs several times more than tamoxifen.

The National Institute for Clinical Excellence (Nice), which vets new treatments, has not yet issued guidance on its use.

Expert Rob Carpenter, consultant surgical oncologist at St Bartholomew's Hospital in London, said: "This is the moment we have been waiting for. This news marks the beginning of a whole new era in breast cancer management."

Like tamoxifen, anastrozole - marketed under the brand name Arimidex - is used to treat breast cancer fuelled by the hormone oestrogen.

Three quarters of the 33,000 breast cancers diagnosed in the UK each year fall into this category.

Anastrozole works in a different way from tamoxifen, blocking the action of an enzyme, aromatase, that helps manufacture oestrogen.

Tamoxifen stops oestrogen binding on to breast tissue, and stimulating tumour growth.

Five year trial

The new licence from the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency follows a major five-year trial involving 9,300 women comparing the benefits of the two drugs.

Anastrozole was found to reduce the risk of breast cancer recurring anywhere in the body by an extra 26 per cent, on top of the 50 per cent reduction offered by tamoxifen.

Results from the ATAC (Arimidex, Tamoxifen, Alone or in Combination) trial - the largest breast cancer trial ever conducted - were published in the Lancet medical journal last December, and presented at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncologists in May.

Compared with tamoxifen, anastrozole was also shown to have fewer serious side effects such as blood clots, strokes and cancer of the womb lining. However patients taking the drug did experience an increased risk of joint pain and fractures.

Professor John Toy, medical director at Cancer Research UK, said: "Research is showing that anastrozole is even more effective than tamoxifen in reducing the risk of breast cancer coming back after initial treatment.

"Until now, the drug has only been available to women who can't take tamoxifen for specific health reasons, such as a high risk of blood clots. This extension to the licence means that more women are now eligible for anastrozole.

"However, it's important for women to discuss their treatment options with their doctor, and in the meantime they should not stop taking their current treatment."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

