TITLE	British men: Fat, unfit and in denial

Last updated at 10:01 04 July 2005

British men seem to like what they see in the mirror - with a quarter in denial about their weight problem, campaigners claim.

As the UK continues to battle the bulge, men seem to be ignoring the fact that they are carrying excess baggage - and increasing their risk of illnesses such as cancer and heart disease.

Cancer Research UK called for more men to take heed of the warnings and change their unhealthy lifestyles.

A national poll of more than 2,000 men asked whether they considered themselves underweight, normal weight, overweight or obese.

Just one per cent considered themselves obese and 39 per cent said they were overweight - but national statistics show that 65 per cent of men are actually overweight or obese.

The vast majority - 54 per cent - considered themselves a normal weight and six per cent thought they were underweight.

The research also found that 65 per cent of men had no idea that being overweight or obese increased their chance of developing cancer.

And three-quarters did not know that being physically inactive also increases the risk of the disease.

Lack of fruit and veg

Only 22 per cent of men ate the recommended minimum of five portions of fruit and vegetables a day.

The poll also found that two-thirds (65 per cent) failed to meet the recommended target of 30 minutes of moderate exercise five times a week.

The research came as Cancer Research UK launched its Man Alive campaign, to raise awareness of cancer among men and highlight ways to reduce the risk.

Figures suggest that obesity may be responsible for around 4,000 cases of cancer in UK men each year.

Recent research also suggested that obesity increases the risk of bowel cancer by 60 per cent.

It is also thought that obesity doubles the risk of being diagnosed with kidney, oesophageal and stomach cancer.

Professor Jane Wardle, director of Cancer Research UK's Health Behaviour Unit, said: "In the space of 10 years the rate of obesity for British men has increased two thirds.

"Women are overweight too but our research shows that more of them know they have a problem and that's the first step in putting it right.

"With so many more men now at an increased risk of cancer, education is more important then ever."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

