TITLE	Pollution from cars linked to child cancer

Last updated at 15:03 11 August 2005

The development of cancer in childhood is strongly linked to pollution from engine exhausts, a researcher from the University of Birmingham has claimed.

Professor George Knox said youngsters were at higher risk of cancer if they lived near emissions hotspots, such as transport depots.

But experts said the public should not be alarmed by the claims and stressed much more research was needed to show what level of exposure posed a threat.

Prof Knox looked at data on 22,500 children who died from cancer in Britain between 1955 and 1980, taking into account where they lived and nearby emissions hotspots for specific chemicals.

These hotspots were identified from published maps of atmospheric pollution levels and included chemicals such as carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, 1,3-butadiene and benzene dioxins.

The researcher also located emissions sources including bus and train stations, transport hubs, oil installations and hospitals.

Chemical emissions

He then compared the number of deaths from childhood cancer that would be expected in a particular area with the actual number of deaths that occurred.

Prof Knox said that children had a higher risk of cancer if they lived within 0.3 kilometres of a chemical emissions hotspot.

Youngsters also faced an increased risk if they lived within 1km of an emissions source, such as a transport hub.

The researcher suggested that 1,3-butadiene and carbon monoxide - both produced by vehicle exhausts and particularly diesel engines - were among the biggest culprits.

He said that when combined with living close to an emissions source, such as a bus or coach station, a child had a 12 times higher risk of dying from cancer than other youngsters.

Professor Knox concluded: "Childhood cancers are strongly determined by prenatal or early postnatal exposures to oil based combustion gases, especially from engine exhausts."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

