TITLE	After Mo's tragic death, just how safe is radiotherapy?

by CHARLOTTE HARDING, Daily Mail

Last updated at 08:44 23 August 2005

WHAT IS RADIOTHERAPY?

Radiotherapy is the use of X-rays to destroy cancer cells by damaging their DNA. During treatment, non-cancerous cells are also often damaged, but normal tissues are usually able to repair themselves. Cancer cells do not have this ability to recover because they are more disorganised structures.

WHEN IS IT USED?

Around four in every ten cancer patients in Britain - an estimated 100,000 people every year - receive radiotherapy. It is given to patients whose cancer is limited to one organ. The aim is to shrink the tumour and kill any rogue cancer cells that may go on to multiply.

It is also used as a palliative treatment for those with incurable cancer, reducing the size of the tumour so that it does not cause pain or complications by pressing on other organs.

HOW MUCH CAN IT EXTEND LIFE?

Results vary because radiotherapy is more effective on some cancers than others, but the treatment can be highly effective. Between 80 and 90 per cent of patients with early stage prostate cancer will be alive and well five years after radiotherapy.

Eighty five per cent of patients with early stage cancer of the cervix are alive five years after the treatment, and 80 per cent of patients with mouth cancer.

WHAT ARE THE RISKS?

Certain parts of the body, such as kidneys and lungs, are more sensitive to radiation than others. There are strict guidelines about the amount of radiation that each part of the body can be exposed to.

Most patients will experience some short-term side-effects. These include tiredness, a feeling of coming down with flu a few days after treatment, and red, sore skin similar to sunburn.

Other short-term side-effects are specific to the area being treated. Radiotherapy to the head, for example, causes hair loss and often nausea. Treatment to the stomach can cause stomach cramps, nausea and weight loss.

In the majority of cases, such short-term side-effects disappear after treatment. However, some patients go on to suffer long-term ill-effects caused by damage to the healthy tissue surrounding the original tumour.

Doctors told Mo Mowlam that intense radiotherapy for a brain tumour, diagnosed in 1997, had caused brain damage leading to a loss of balance and a form of dementia, and that the rate of decline would increase.

Tests last month led doctors to conclude that her treatment led to a shrinkage of the brain, which put pressure on blood vessels, causing them to fur up. Dr Mowlam learnt of the damage only weeks before a heavy fall at her home earlier this month.

ARE SOME PATIENTS MORE AT RISK THAN OTHERS?

Certain underlying health conditions can make radiotherapy more risky.

Conditions that cause poor blood supply, such as diabetes and peripheral vascular disease, can make the treatment more dangerous because they prevent the body from healing itself effectively.

In addition, some people are more sensitive to X-rays than others, but it is impossible to tell in advance who these patients are.

IS IT COMMON FOR A PATIENT TO DIE FROM RADIOTHERAPY?

There are no official figures, but Professor Horrich says only a handful of patients a year lose their lives to the treatment.

CAN PATIENTS TAKE ANY STEPS TO PROTECT THEMSELVES?

Despite attempts to develop drugs that protect against the side-effects of radiotherapy, none is yet available in Britain. In some cases the drugs being trialled were found to be also protective to the cancer cells.

One drug, Amifostine, which is claimed to protect against scarring of the bowel in bowel cancer patients, is available in the US but is not used in Britain because of doubts about its efficacy.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

