TITLE	Smokers 'twice as likely to go blind'

Last updated at 09:41 07 September 2005

Smokers are twice as likely to lose their sight in later life compared to non-smokers, campaigners have warned.

Many of the UK's 13 million smokers will be unaware of the link between smoking and age-related macular degeneration (AMD), which can lead to blindness.

But the AMD Alliance UK said the link between smoking and the condition was now as robust as the link between smoking and lung cancer.

AMD is the leading cause of sight loss in the UK, with around 500,000 sufferers. An estimated 54,000 people have AMD as a result of smoking.

Now a report by the AMD alliance has uncovered widespread ignorance about the condition.

A survey of over 1,000 people published on RNIB Eye Test Action Day found that only seven per cent knew that AMD affected the eyes.

But seven out of 10 smokers would either stop smoking permanently (41 per cent) or cut down (28 per cent) if they thought their habit could harm their eyesight.

Pauline Edwards, from Salford, said she had smoked most of her adult life but would have stopped if she had been aware of the link with sight loss.

The 50-year-old said: "I smoked for years. Now I have AMD, am partially sighted in one eye and am likely to go blind.

"When you smoke you cannot imagine what it is like to have lung cancer and especially when you are young the risk of dying earlier doesn't come into it.

"I am a nurse, I saw people die from smoking-related diseases and that did not make me kick the habit.

"But if I had been told that I could lose my sight because of smoking I would have given up. I stopped the day I found out."

People 'not aware of the link'

Steve Winyard, head of campaigns at the Royal National Institute of the Blind (RNIB) and chairman of AMD Alliance UK, said: "Smoking is the only proven cause of AMD that people can do anything about, yet people are not aware of the link and most people have not even heard of the condition.

"The message is simple - do not take up smoking and if you do, stop.

"People also need to make sure they have regular eye tests to check their eyes are healthy - an eye test can save your sight."

The RNIB is calling on the Government to introduce warnings on cigarette packets about the risk of AMD and to fund a public awareness campaign on the dangers of smoking to your eyesight.

"RNIB is also joining the British Medical Association and the Royal College of Ophthalmologists in calling for a ban on smoking in all enclosed public places and workplaces across the UK," Mr Winyard said.

Today's report highlighted that quitting smoking can have major benefits in the long and short term.

Research has shown that people who stopped smoking 20 years ago have a similar risk of developing AMD as non-smokers and the risk starts to decrease after 10 years of not smoking.

Co-author of the report Simon Kelly, a consultant ophthalmic surgeon at the Bolton Eye Unit, said: "Knowledge of the link between smoking and AMD is very low but evidence from Australia and New Zealand shows that raising awareness of this link creates a powerful message for the general public."

He said that a survey of patients in Bolton suggested that fear of blindness was as compelling as fear of lung cancer and heart disease as a motivator to quit.

"In my clinical experience when people are diagnosed with AMD and learn of the link with smoking they are often sufficiently shocked and motivated to want to stop smoking straight away," the consultant said.

More information on AMD and sight problems is available by visiting www.rnib.org.uk.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

