TITLE	Unhealthy teens at risk of cancer

Last updated at 16:07 07 September 2005

Teenagers are being warned that their unhealthy lifestyles now could lead to them developing cancer in the future.

Cancer charity Tenovus said that one in two of today's teenagers could have cancer in 15 years unless they changed their bad habits and avoided becoming obese.

The charity is challenging parents to reduce their child's risk of cancer by improving what they eat and the amount of exercise they do.

Tenovus said that half of the population would have cancer 15 years from now if no action was taken to change lifestyles.

The charity has launched a new campaign, You or Me - Cancer: a challenge for all of us, in efforts to make people take notice of warnings over weight and inactivity.

It is estimated that as many as one in five cancer deaths are linked to obesity.

Rates of obesity in children and young people have been increasing in recent years, increasing fears of a impending health timebomb.

Crash diet 'not the answer'

Tenovus said part of the problem was weaning children off chocolate and chips, but going on a crash diet was not the answer.

Dr Richard Walker, chief executive of Tenovus, said: "Expert advice is that most children who are overweight should not actually lose weight.

"Instead, they should be encouraged to maintain their weight so they gradually 'grow into it' as they get it together.

"Children should not be put on a weight-loss diet without medical advice as this can affect their growth.

"Unregulated dieting - especially in teenage girls - may lead to the development of eating disorders."

The charity said it wanted to tackle the obesity epidemic by encouraging people to eat a healthy balanced diet, change their eating habits and take more exercise.

Dr Walker added: "The majority of people are aware that smoking and overexposure to the sun are linked to cancer but do not think of the links to obesity.

"There are studies which show the more excess weight a person carries, the greater the risk of some cancers, such as breast, kidney and colon to name a few.

"Obviously, there is no guarantee that you will not develop cancer even with a healthy active lifestyle but it does substantially reduce the risks.

"For example, an overweight woman has twice the risk of developing cancer as a lean one and one in four of kidney cancers would not develop if people weren't overweight."

More information on cancer and the work of Tenovus is available by visiting www.tenovus.com.

 Sorry we are unable to accept comments for legal reasons.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

