TITLE	Chip-eating kids 'raise breast cancer risk'

Last updated at 10:43 14 September 2005

Pre-school children who regularly eat chips may face an increased risk of breast cancer in later life, research has suggested.

Diet has long been known to influence the development of several types of cancer, with overweight and obese people most at risk.

Now an American study claims that the diet of pre-school children affects their chances of getting breast cancer much later in life.

In particular, researchers from Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, said that regularly eating French fries was linked to a significantly increased risk of breast cancer.

They analysed data from 582 women with breast cancer and 1,569 women without the disease in 1993, who were part of the Nurses' Health Studies.

The researchers looked at the diets of the women when they were aged three to five, using information from their mothers who were asked how often their daughters ate or drank various products.

Increased cancer risk

Researcher Dr Karin Michels and colleagues estimated that for each additional serving of French fries per week that a woman ate as a pre-schooler, her risk of breast cancer in later life increased by 27 per cent.

The researchers said that while eating potatoes themselves was not associated with increased risk, the preparation of French fries - frying in fat high in saturated fats and trans-fatty acids - may be of relevance.

The study, published online in the International Journal of Cancer, also found that regular consumption of whole fat milk each day was linked to a small decrease in breast cancer risk.

Dr Michels, associate professor at Harvard Medical School, said: "Researchers are finding more evidence that diet early in life could play a role in the development of diseases in women later in life.

"This study provides additional evidence that breast cancer may originate during the early phases of a woman's life and that eating habits during that phase may be particularly important to reduce future risk of breast cancer."

Dr Michels said their data should be interpreted with caution as information on diet was dependent on the mother's ability to recall her daughter's diet.

"Mothers were asked to recall their daughter's pre-school diet after the participants' breast cancer status was known and it is possible that mothers of women with breast cancer recalled their daughter's diet differently than mothers of healthy women.

"Other foods perceived as less healthy such as hot dogs or ice cream, however, were not associated with breast cancer risk," she said.

Role of diet

Dr Michels said that little information was available on the role of diet during early life for breast cancer risk.

"Breast cancer is a devastating disease and research such as this is important in helping guide future studies that will demonstrate how women can reduce their risk of this deadly disease," she added.

Pamela Goldberg, chief executive of the UK's Breast Cancer Campaign, said: "Studies looking into how nutrition in early life, puberty and beyond might affect the risk of developing breast cancer are a very interesting area of research.

"In this case we need to take into account that the study relies solely on mothers recalling what their daughters ate perhaps 40 or 50 years ago.

"We would encourage women of all ages to eat a healthy well balanced diet with plenty of fruit and vegetables to improve their general health."

 Sorry we are unable to accept comments for legal reasons.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

