TITLE	Left handers 'more likely to get breast cancer'

Last updated at 10:03 26 September 2005

Left-handed women may be more at risk from breast cancer, new research suggests.

A team in the Netherlands looked at the relationship between handedness and cases of breast cancer in more than 12,000 healthy, middle-aged women who were born between 1932 and 1941.

The researchers also took body measurements and assessed risk factors such as economic status, smoking habits, family history of breast cancer and reproductive background.

The study, published online by the British Medical Journal, found left-handed women were more than twice as likely to develop pre-menopausal breast cancer as non-left handed women.

Even when taking into account all risk factors, the overall association was hardly affected, the team from University Medical Centre Utrecht said.

Exposure to sex hormones

The researchers said that the origins of the link may lie in exposure to high levels of sex hormones in the womb.

This can induce left-handedness as well as cause changes in breast tissue.

The researchers concluded: "Although the underlying mechanisms remain elusive, our results support the hypothesis that left-handedness is related to increased risk of breast cancer."

Breast cancer is the most common cancer for women in the UK and each year, there are over 41,000 new cases diagnosed.

The cancer accounts for almost one in three of all cancer cases in women, while the lifetime risk for breast cancer in women is one in nine.

Emma Taggart, director of policy and campaigns at charity Breakthrough Breast Cancer, said: "Women who are left-handed should not worry about these findings.

"Although this is an intriguing study, it doesn't give us enough evidence to link left handedness with breast cancer.

"We advise all women to follow a healthy lifestyle by eating a balanced diet, drinking less alcohol and exercising regularly, to help reduce their breast cancer risk.

"It's also vital for women to be breast aware and visit their GP if they are concerned about changes in their breasts."

Pamela Goldberg, chief executive of Breast Cancer Campaign, said: "This is an interesting, although inconclusive piece of research to suggest that innate left handedness is linked to an increased risk of breast cancer in pre-menopausal women as more research is needed to actually identify the underlying mechanisms behind this.

"It is important to remember that age is the single most important factor in influencing breast cancer risk, with 80 per cent of all breast cancers occurring in post-menopausal women.

"At present the best way to influence your chance of surviving breast cancer is to detect it early by being breast aware which means knowing your body, recognising any unusual changes and reporting them to your doctor without delay."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

