TITLE	Breast cancer link to childhood obesity probed

Last updated at 12:51 12 October 2005

A probe is being launched in the UK to study the link between childhood obesity and breast cancer, after an American study found a possible link.

The study, funded by a grant from the World Cancer Research Fund and the Breast Cancer Campaign, will focus on how diet affects a girl's growth and the age when she starts her periods.

Both of these factors are known to be linked to the risk of breast cancer.

It follows a US study which suggested that pre-school children who regularly eat chips may face an increased risk of breast cancer in later life.

The researchers from Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, said that regularly eating chips was linked to a significantly increased risk of breast cancer.

Chips increased chance of breast cancer

Karin Michels and colleagues estimated that for each additional serving per week that a woman ate as a pre-schooler, her risk of breast cancer in later life increased by 27 per cent.

The UK study will use researchers from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM), University College London and Cambridge University.

Isabel dos Santos Silva, from LSHTM's non-communicable disease epidemiology unit, said: "Breast cancer is likely to be caused by complex interactions between our genes, lifestyle and environmental factors.

The research will study over 2,500 British women who have been followed since their birth in 1946. There is detailed information on their childhood growth, diet throughout life, and other lifestyle factors.

Ms Silva added: "It is hoped that this research will help to uncover any specific aspects of early life nutrition that may affect the risk of breast cancer later in life."

Previous studies have suggested that what youngsters eat could affect their health as adults, including increased risk of cancer and other diseases.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

