TITLE	Super-broccoli to fight cancer

Last updated at 13:28 07 December 2005

Your genes could mean that eating broccoli to help protect against cancer may not be enough - what you need is "super-broccoli."

Researchers have found around half the population don't have the right genes to fully benefit from eating the green vegetable. They retain the cancer fighting chemical sulforaphane for only a few hours.

But they could compensate for the difference in their genetic make-up by eating the super variety, with higher levels of the active plant chemical sulforaphane.

"Super-broccoli" is currently being developed and may not be in the shops for another three years.

In the meantime researchers from the Institute of Food Research (IFR) say that eating larger portions may be the best way to compensate.

Lead scientist Professor Richard Mithen said: "Eating a few portions of broccoli each week may help to reduce the risk of cancer.

"Some individuals, who lack a gene called GSTM1, appear to get less cancer protection from broccoli than those who have the gene.

"However, if you consume larger portions of broccoli, or broccoli with higher levels of sulforaphane, such as the 'super-broccoli', you may be able to retain as much sulforaphane in your body as those who have the gene.

Eating larger portions has the additional benefit of consuming a rich source of other vitamins and minerals.

Broccoli is the main source of the natural compound sulforaphane and belongs to the crucifer family of vegetables which includes cabbage, cauliflower and Brussels sprouts.

The researchers said that sulforaphane is the main isothiocyanate derived from broccoli and the "super broccoli" variety contains 3.4 times more of the compound than standard types.

Evidence shows that these isothiocyanates are among the most powerful anti-cancer agents in the diet.

The "super broccoli" is being developed by Seminis Inc using traditional plant breeding methods.

The IFR researchers said that around 50 per cent of the population lack the GSTM1 gene.

Pick n mix

They said that while these people may gain less cancer protection from eating broccoli, it was likely that they gained more from eating other types of crucifers, such as cabbages.

The researchers said that the best advice was to eat a mixture of different types of crucifer vegetable.

The IFR research was funded by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council, the University of Nottingham and Seminis Inc.

The IFR is carrying out ongoing research to find the optimal levels of a range of food compounds for human health.

Josephine Querido, cancer information officer at Cancer Research UK, said: "The research backs current thinking that genetic differences may affect how we absorb nutrients from our food.

"We know that a healthy balanced diet is an important factor in preventing cancer, especially cancers of the digestive system.

"But when it comes to food, there is no one particular 'super' fruit or vegetable that will protect you from cancer.

"Experts have proven that the best way to reduce your risk of many cancers is to eat a healthy balanced diet.

"This should include at least five portions a day of a variety of fruit and vegetables."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

