TITLE	Breast cancer drug cuts death risk

Last updated at 14:18 10 December 2005

A new breast cancer drug that shuts off the supply of oestrogen has the potential to save thousands of lives in the UK, researchers said.

Data from three international trials involving more than 4,000 women showed that switching from standard therapy to Arimidex after two years can reduce death rates by 29 per cent.

The drug is currently licensed for the after-surgery treatment of post-menopausal women with early invasive breast cancer fuelled by the sex hormone oestrogen.

However, it is still awaiting a green light from the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (Nice), which issues guidelines on the use of new treatments in England and Wales.

Nice is not due to consider Arimidex until November next year. Meanwhile, the drug has already been given the seal of approval by Scotland's drug-vetting body.

Arimidex, the trade name for anastrozole, belongs to a new class of drugs called aromatase inhibitors which stop the production of oestrogen.

Three quarters of post-menopausal women with breast cancer have a form of the disease that is sensitive to the hormone. Without oestrogen, the tumours find it hard to survive.

Tamoxifen, which blocks the activity of oestrogen without preventing its production, is currently the standard treatment for hormone-sensitive breast cancers.

Earlier research showed that a five year course of treatment, which involved switching from tamoxifen to Arimidex after two years, cut the chances of recurrence by 26%. This was over and above the 50% reduction due to tamoxifen.

The new meta-analysis study, pooling together data from three similarly designed international trials, provides the first definitive evidence of improved survival with Arimidex.

It showed that the risk of dying was reduced by 29 per cent for women who switched to Arimidex after two years.

For every 100 women who would have died within five years, 29 were saved. Cancer survival to five years is normally regarded as a cure.

A total of 13,000 women die from breast cancer each year in the UK. Many of these deaths could be prevented by using Arimidex, the research suggests.

The research was conducted by Dr Walter Jonat, from the University of Kiel in Germany.

He analysed information from three major trials, Austrian Breast and Colorectal Cancer Study Group (ABCSG) 8, Arimidex-Nolvadex (Arno) 95, and Italian Tamoxifen Arimidex (ITA).

By combining more than one set of data, meta-analysis can provide powerful results.

The findings, presented at the San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium in Texas, USA, not only showed a dramatic death reduction, but also 45 per cent fewer cases of disease recurrence.

Jeffrey Tobias, Professor of Cancer Medicine at University College London Hospitals, said: "Survival is the ultimate goal in the treatment of early breast cancer, and these results provide compelling evidence that anastrozole has the potential to save the lives of significantly more cancer patients who are post-menopausal and hormone-receptor positive.

"It is clear that at whatever point you use it, anastrozole is a more effective alternative to tamoxifen."

Mike Baum, Emeritus Professor of Surgery at University College London, said: "Importantly, we know that the risk of the cancer returning peaks in the first two years after surgery, and that women should be given an AI (aromatase inhibitor) at the earliest opportunity to minimise the risk in this crucial period. These significant new data highlight that for those women who are already taking tamoxifen, greater benefit may still be achieved by replacing tamoxifen with Arimidex."

Dr Emma Pennery, Nurse Consultant at the charity Breast Cancer Care, said: The goal of adjuvant (additional) therapy is to keep patients free from recurrence and risk of serious side effects for as long as possible. This is very encouraging news for women with breast cancer."

One disadvantage of aromatase inhibitors is that removing oestrogen leaves women vulnerable to the brittle bone disease, osteoporosis.

This is one reason why patients only complete their treatment on Arimidex after starting with tamoxifen.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

