TITLE	Cancer drug 'helps most at risk'

Last updated at 16:03 29 December 2005

Changing to a newer breast cancer treatment could save the lives of many women battling with the disease, research suggests.

Women at a high risk of the disease returning are most likely to benefit from using Femara (letrozole), according to the research.

Earlier this month the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) approved the use of the drug for postmenopausal women with early breast cancer straight after surgery.

The trial results which contributed to the drug's licence being extended have now been published in the New England Journal of Medicine.

The study, involving 8,000 women including more than 400 in the UK, found that the chance of cancer returning was most reduced in women who faced the biggest risk of the disease returning and are more likely to develop secondary tumours.

In these women, whose cancer had already spread to the lymph nodes, the researchers found a 29 per cent drop in the recurrence of the disease in those taking Femara compared to those taking the "gold standard" tamoxifen treatment.

The study found a 28 per cent reduction in the risk of the disease returning in women who had already had chemotherapy.

The same trial also found that in all women taking Femara there was a 27 per cent reduction in the risk of cancer spreading to other parts of the body and a 19% drop in the risk of breast cancer returning compared to those taking tamoxifen.

Femara is a type of drug called an aromatase inhibitor which stops the natural production of oestrogen - the hormone that is responsible for the growth and recurrence of many breast cancers.

There has been concern recently that cancer patients in some areas are being denied access to the newest drugs because of financial concerns of NHS trusts.

This has led some to take legal action to make their health authority fund the treatment. Nigel Bundred, a professor in surgical oncology at Wythenshawe Hospital, Manchester, said: "These results are fantastic news and give hope to women with breast cancer - especially those at high risk of their cancer recurring.

"They show that Femara is more effective than tamoxifen when given to women after surgery and offers even greater advantages to these particularly vulnerable women."

Liz Caroll, from charity Breast Cancer Care, said: "These results further suggest the benefits of using aromatase inhibitors over tamoxifen in treating early invasive breast cancer and indicate that many more lives could be saved.

 "Many women, like those we support, with breast cancer will welcome the news that they might benefit from this new treatment option, as will the healthcare professionals treating them."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

