TITLE	Vitamin cuts risk of cancer by half

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Last updated at 09:31 28 December 2005

A large dose of vitamin D a day can halve the chance of developing cancer, a major study has shown.

Scientists believe that vitamin D deficiency may cause thousands of cancer deaths every year.

They recommend a daily dose of 25microgrammes - equivalent to three to four servings of oily fish.

Other good food sources are eggs, milk and cod liver oil.

Multivitamin pills contain about a quarter of the amount, though there are higher levels in cod liver oil capsules and combined vitamin D and calcium pills.

Sunbathing also boosts levels as vitamin D is made in the body in response to sunlight. But there are dangers in over-exposure, with fair-skinned people in particular advised to stick to food sources.

The report follows research indicating that good levels of vitamin D can prevent more than 25 chronic diseases.

In the latest project, U.S. researchers carried out a systematic review of 63 studies, looking at the relationship between blood levels of vitamin D and cancer risk.

Prevents diseases

The papers, published worldwide between 1966 and 2004, included 30 investigations of colon cancer, 13 of breast cancer, 26 of prostate cancer and seven of ovarian cancer.

Analysis showed that, for at least some cancers, the vitamin D factor could not be ignored, says a report in the American Journal of Public Health.

Professor Cedric Garland, of the Moores Cancer Centre at the University of California, San Diego, called for urgent public health action.

He said: "Primary prevention of these cancers has largely been neglected, but we now have proof that the incidence of colon, breast, and ovarian cancer can be reduced dramatically by increasing the intake of vitamin D.

"Breast cancer will strike one in eight women. Early detection using mammography reduces mortality rates by approximately 20 per cent, but the use of vitamin D might prevent this cancer in the first place."

Professor Garland said a lack of vitamin D could explain the high death rates from cancer among certain groups.

The study found that people in the north-eastern U.S. were at increased risk because of lower sunlight levels. Poorer cancer survival rates among African-Americans may be because it is more difficult for dark-skinned people to make the natural form of the vitamin, known as D3.

The new results will add to a recent surge of interest in vitamin D for cancer prevention and possible treatment.

Earlier this year, Professor Johan Moan of the Institute for Cancer Research, in Oslo, studied all the people diagnosed with cancer in Norway between 1964 and 2000. He found the risk of dying within three years was 50 per cent lower for those diagnosed during summer and autumn - when blood levels of vitamin D are highest - than in winter.

Professor Moan said: "In Nordic countries, and in Britain, practically no vitamin D is generated in the skin during the winter because solar radiation contains too little ultraviolet B. In wartime Britain, children were regularly given cod liver oil for extra vitamins."

Professor Tim Oliver, of Bart's and The London, Queen Mary's School of Medicine and Dentistry, is planning a trial of vitamin D supplements for prostate cancer patients. Oliver Gillie, who runs the non-profit Health Research Forum, published a 41-page report last year showing that topping up levels of vitamin D could help prevent a number of diseases.

The report, Sunlight Robbery, said insufficient levels of the vitamin are linked with 16 different cancers, several nervous system diseases, including schizophrenia and MS, diabetes, high blood pressure, polycystic ovary disease and dental decay.

Biochemist Professor Richard Strange, of the University Hospital of North Staffordshire, said vitamin D slows the rate of growth of cancer cells, although how it does this is only partly understood.

Professor Garland's recommended intake is half the upper limit set by the National Academy of Sciences in the U.S.

In the UK, the Food Standards Agency does not recommend a specific dose unless you are pregnant, elderly, Asian, get little sun exposure and eat no meat or oily fish when 10mcg is advised. It says daily supplements of 25mcg are unlikely to cause any harm.

Among the vitamin's vital functions are regulating the amount of calcium and phosphate in the body, which keeps bones and teeth healthy.

The danger with taking excessive doses for long periods is that the body absorbs too much calcium, which could weaken bones and possibly damage liver and kidneys.

Sara Hiom, head of health information at the charity Cancer Research UK, urged caution over the new findings. She said: "The evidence linking vitamin D levels with cancer risk is complex and confusing. Further research is needed."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

