TITLE	Jane Seymour and her HRT dilemma

By BONNIE SIEGLER, Daily Mail

Last updated at 08:30 18 January 2006

As the body clock ticks on it is a dilemma most women will face. Should you take hormone replacement therapy to ease the symptoms of the menopause - despite increased risks of breast cancer, heart disease and stroke - or try to get by through diet and alternative therapies?

Early last year, British actress Jane Seymour took what she thought might just be her last dose of hormone replace ment therapy (HRT).

The 54-year-old star of Dr Quinn Medicine Woman had been taking artificial hormones since she began the menopause at the age of 47. But after seven years of treatment, the mother of four felt it was time to give the drugs a rest and try a nat ural approach to managing her menopausal symptoms.

Instead, Jane chose a combination of complementary and holistic medicine which she hoped would control the natural side-effects of the menopause; the mood swings, irritability, dry skin and hot flushes caused when the body's levels of the female sex hormone oestrogen plummet.

But now, just a few months later, after her 'grouchy' moods and flushes returned with a vengeance, Jane has admitted defeat She is back on HRT.

"In the end I had to weigh up the pros and cons," she says. "I knew about the risks, but quality of life was important, too I clearly needed regular medical help."

Cancer controversy

Jane stopped taking HRT purely because of the controversy surrounding the issue An American study published in 2002 linked the drug to increased risks for breast cancer, heart disease and stroke causing widespread alarm.

Although subsequent studies have shown that, conversely, HRT can protect against some other forms of cancer and osteoporosis, most doctors advise against long-term use without close monitoring.

"I had taken it for seven years and, while wanted a good quality of life, I was aware that HRT increases the risk of certain med ical conditions such as blood clots, stroke and breast cancer. So I went to see my doctor and then for a second opinion.

"One doctor said she didn't want me to continue taking it, the other said to continue for quality of life. When I asked them why, they kept handing me books to read. I realised it was up to me to make up my own mind."

Jane began the menopause just two years after the traumatic birth of her twin boys, Kristopher and John, now aged ten. They were born after several cycles of IVF and two miscarriages. Jane even developed pre-eclampsia - a condition that causes blood pressure to soar and can be lifethreatening - when she was carrying the twins.

Eventually they were born six weeks prematurely and were on heart monitors for the first four months.

Support: Jane with husband James Keach

Today Jane, married to her fourth husband and father of her twins, actor and director James Keach, admits that her hormones had still not recovered from that trauma when she began to experience the start of the menopause, a time that most women dread.

"When I had my twins at 45, I put my system through the wringer," she says. "On top of that, my early 40s had been especially traumatic. I lost my father to cancer and my husband (David Flynn) to another woman.

'Lost faith in being happy'

"I lost faith in ever being happy again. When the menopause took hold I had the typical symptoms of hot flushes and feeling grouchy. I did try to use mind over matter to control them - but I realised that I needed a back-up plan.

"So I tried HRT. And once I started taking it, I found that those symptoms disappeared and I could stop worrying and get on with my everyday life."

During this time she starred in several films such as Wedding Crashers, and was voted one of the world's sexiest women in her 50s, second only to Joanna Lumley.

Her looks remained so youthful that she was accused of having a fake passport by an incredulous immigration officer who was insistent she was 34 - not 54.

But then, like many woman who have taken HRT for several years, Jane began to worry about what she might be doing to her long-term wellbeing.

On the face of it Jane was an ideal candidate to take a natural approach. A doctor's daughter, she has always maintained a healthy scepticism about some of Hollywood's wackier crazes, while making sure she and her brood of four children and two stepchildren maintained a balanced diet.

The British-born actress keeps her larder stocked with produce from her large organic garden, which overlooks the ocean in Malibu, California.

"We have every citrus tree known to man," she says. "And we grow an astonishing variety of soft fruit and vegetables."

As well as eating healthily, Jane has been a long-term advocate of yoga. To keep fit, she plays golf and skis. She also knows her complementary medicine.

As a member of the American National Foundation for Alternative Medicine, Jane has spoken before the US Congress about the benefits of alternative medicines.

So once she had made the decision to give up HRT, Jane made sure that she followed a diet high in natural phytoestrogens - substances found in plants that mimic the action of oestrogen - including soya products, chickpeas and legumes, and flax oil, and took supplements including red clover and alfalfa, which are also high in phytoestrogens.

She also took - and still does take - a multivitamin and omega-3 fatty/acids supplements. But despite her best efforts, all too quickly the symptoms which had plagued her returned.

'I couldn't handle it'

"Some people can deal with menopause symptoms through diet, nutrition, vitamins and exercise. But I couldn't handle it," she says, with admirable honesty.

At first it was hard for Jane to accept that her famous mental toughness couldn't get her through her difficulties.

"When I worked on Dr Quinn. I would do a regular 16-18 hour day and I was the only person on set who never got sick," she says.

"I am a firm believer that many things - including laughter and happiness - help to boost the immune system as well as diet, exercise and supplements. But although I was knowledgeable about those things, I found I just wasn't able to do enough.

"I did manage to handle the symptoms to a degree, but was it pleasurable? No. I experienced all the uncomfortable symptoms I had avoided when I took HRT, and in the end I decided to go back on the drugs again. Quality of life won out."

In fact, in the end Jane has managed to find a compromise between alternative and conventional medicine that suits both her lifestyle and her beliefs.

She has continued her healthy diet, high in phytoestrogens and she takes her HRT via a patch rather than in tablet form. When the body is able to absorb medicine directly into the bloodstream via the skin, rather than the digestive system, there are usually fewer side-effects.

She has also halved the dose she was on, and finds that her symptoms are just as well controlled. Finally, she also has her hormone levels checked several times a year.

"Everyone was telling me different things, but I realised that each woman has to create her own way of dealing with the menopause, one that she is comfortable with and one that works for her.

"My way was to use a combination of Western and alternative medicine - and, incidentally, I would do the same if I had cancer.

"I weighed up the risks and benefits and concluded that because I was not at high risk of any of the diseases associated with HRT, I decided to take it - but on my terms."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

