TITLE	Coffee could stir your thirst for love

By EMILY COOK, Daily Mail

Last updated at 15:05 03 February 2006

It is thought to prevent cancer, stimulate memory, and is a fragrant pick-me-up when energy levels flag.

Now a cup of coffee could also hold the key to boosting a woman's sex drive, a study suggests.

Scientists say caffeine lifts the female libido by stimulating parts of the brain that govern arousal.

But unlike television's Gold Blend couple in the Nescafe adverts of the Eighties and Nineties - whose passion grew with each cup - real coffee addicts may miss out on the buzz.

The aphrodisiac power seems to work only on those who do not regularly drink coffee.

Study chief Dr Fay Guarraci from Southwestern University in Texas, said: "Lots of research has been dedicated to male sexual behaviour and motivation, but much less has been done on females.

"Understanding the circuits that control this behaviour will help us find out more about how the brain works and what part mediates motivation because sexual behaviour is a motivative behaviour."

In the study, to be published in the Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behaviour journal, Dr Guarraci and her team gave a moderate dose of caffeine to 108 female rats and monitored their mating behaviour.

Sexual appetite

Those given the stimulant before mating with a male partner displayed an increased sexual appetite and were more likely to scurry back for a second session than those not given caffeine.

Dr Guarraci said the effects produced in the rats appeared to go beyond a simple burst of energy.

"The behaviour was specifically directed at a sexually active partner, a male rat, rather than a social partner, a female rat."

She said caffeine-rich drinks might not have the same effects on women who consume large quantities of coffee or tea.

"These rats never had caffeine before," she said.

"In humans, it might enhance the sexual experience only among people who are not habitual users."

Caffeine levels in coffee, tea and cola drinks have been linked with increased blood pressure or higher risk of stroke.

But other studies have suggested a cup of coffee can boost the memory and possibly reduce the risk of liver cancer.

Researchers say that human studies are needed to confirm their findings about caffeine's effect on the libido.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

