TITLE	A day in the life of a sunbather's skin

Bonnie Estridge

Exposure to the sun is the main cause of premature skin ageing and skin cancer. And scientists and doctors have said that no tan is a safe tan.

So why do so many of us still soak up the sun's rays? Here, suncare scientific adviser Mike Brown explains the skin changes that you can expect from just one day's sunbathing.

9am Our sunbather hits the beach. The skin starts to absorb UVA immediately. Of the sun's ultraviolet (UV) rays, UVA and UVB are the two main types. UVB is the main culprit in causing skin cancer, while UVA can accelerate skin's ageing process and may act with UVB to induce skin cancer.

9.15am UVA starts to generate free radicals in the skin. These are highly reactive molecules which cause damage to skin tissue and DNA, its genetic material.

Damage to DNA starts as the skin begins to absorb UVB. The structure or genetic code of the DNA starts to change so that it cannot do its job properly - that is, to make the proteins to keep the skin healthy. The skin warms up and loses moisture through evaporation.

10am UVB intensity is increasing rapidly as the sun climbs higher in the sky, resulting in lethal injury to some skin cells. The skin is now quite dry and needs moisturising.

11am Damaged skin cells begin releasing chemicals which start up the body's defence mechanisms. These aim to kill off the injured cells which cannot function properly and could become cancerous. Sufficient UVA and UVB has been absorbed to cause a slight sunburn, but it will not be visible for a few more hours. Production of free radicals increases, and these interact with collagen and elastin - which give our skin fibres their elasticity causing damage which will manifest eventually as premature ageing.

Noon The immune defence system becomes damaged and its effectiveness is reduced by half. In need of another measure to prevent destruction by UV, the skin cells trigger melanin production. Our sunbather will see evidence of this when, in a few days, the skin starts to turn brown. A tan indicates skin damage.

The skin's structure at the granular layer beneath the surface, where new skin cells have been made, has become cemented together. When they reach the skin surface, these cells will be shed in sheets - this is the 'peeling' we see a few days after suntanning. The amount of UV now accumulated guarantees significant discomfort later in the day.

1pm The sun, now directly overhead, is at its strongest. The skin takes on a warm glow and becomes taut - the first signs of inflammation in response to UV damage. The skin is drying out fast, so applying a moisturiser is essential. There is now a risk of dehydration through sweating, so it is vital to drink lots of water.

The skin shows signs of turning pink - the warning that things are becoming serious. Extreme discomfort will inevitably result. The effect of premature skin ageing is accelerated and the skin cancer risk has increased.

2pm The skin will feel hot and be visibly pink from sunburn. DNA damage will now be severe. Natural cooling mechanisms may no longer be effective. This means either that the sweat glands have become blocked and inflamed or that you can't sweat enough to cool the skin, and this could give rise to prickly heat, an itchy rash.

3pm The UV is still hammering the immune system, which is likely to be down to a third of normal activity - further increasing vulnerability to skin infections and cancer. The skin looks burned. By evening it will be red and painful and it may blister. Our sunbather is also likely to suffer a fever.

5pm The skin is red, taut and uncomfortable. The natural DNA repair mechanism has switched on and enzymes are produced to cut out the damaged parts of DNA and replace them with fresh material. The biological warnings drive our sunworshipper into the shade.

 8pm DNA damage is permanent. Pain is severe and may well be accompanied by nausea and fever. Our sunbather may feel the need to seek medical attention. The skin is very red and inflamed, and may be beginning to blister due to chemicals which, as they repair cell damage, cause histimine to be released in the deep layers of the skin, which leads to inflammation. Applying after-sun lotion is important. It helps to stop the drying effects, prevent peeling and has a soothing, anti-inflammatory action. DNA damage is there for good. It can never be reversed.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

