TITLE	Is your sun cream doing you more harm than good?

Stephanie Zinser

A report by the World Health Organisation has announced, alarmingly, that people who use sun protection creams may be more at risk of skin cancers than people who don't use them at all, because they expose themselves to the sun for far longer. So do they really keep their promises, or are they a great white con?

HOW DO SUNCREAMS WORK?

Suncreams work in two basic ways: Sun blocks contain inorganic compounds such as zinc or titanium oxide to reflect or scatter the harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays. They are usually thick, white creams that aim to prevent the sun from reaching our delicate skin. Newer formulations have become less opaque as the chemistry behind them has advanced, although the principle behind their action remains the same.

Sun tan lotions contain organic compounds which absorb the UV rays - for example salicylates, PABA derivatives and benzonphenones. Rather than act as a barrier on the surface, they soak into the skin. You should apply them at least 45 minutes before sun exposure to enable them to become effective. Most of us don't apply suncreams thickly or evenly enough, with the result that protection is patchy and ineffective.

WHAT ARE SPF RATINGS?

The SPF rating is measured by smearing the sunscreen on a volunteer using a quantity of 2mg per square centimetre of skin. Light is then shone on both treated and untreated sections of skin, and the time after which the untreated section of skin just begins to show signs of reddening (called the minimum erythemal dose, or MED) is noted. By comparing how much further light exposure is needed on the treated area before it shows the same MED provides the measure of SPF.

WHAT ARE UVAs AND UVBs?

UVA and UVB are different types of light produced by the sun. The SPF rating system relates to UVB, which is believed to be responsible for sunburn and skin cancer, especially malignant melanoma. UVA burns less and, because of this, was initially thought to be relatively harmless. In fact it is now recognised that UVA plays a far greater role in skin ageing and longer-term damage (including skin cancer) than originally thought.

A star rating indicates protection for UVA. Whether a product gets the minimum one star or maximum four stars depends not only on how high the overall level of protection against UVA and UVB is, but on whether the cream protects against both frequencies of UV light equally.

WHAT ABOUT SKIN TYPE?

Professor Nicholas Lowe, a London dermatologist, says there is no difference between the protection that fair skins and an olive or even dark- skinned person should use.

'On a normal summer day, if you are outside for only a short time, then an SPF15 should be adequate if applied properly. But people spending a lot of time outdoors, or on holiday abroad, should wear at least a waterproof SPF 30 - and the same applies for children. 'The problem is that if you apply SPF 15 sunscreen too thinly, you may end up with the equivalent protection of only SPF 3 or 4. It's a serious mistake to make.' Professor Lowe believes no SPF lower than 15 should be sold or used, and all sunscreens should have UVA protection with three to four stars.

HOW MUCH SHOULD YOU USE?

To get adequate protection from your sunscreen, Which? consumer's association calculates that 'a typical 200ml bottle contains enough sunscreen for an average adult to cover their whole body five times'. In other words, a 200ml bottle is just enough for a couple of days in the sun. You should make sure you apply sun tan lotion liberally, whenever you are exposed to the sun for longer than 15 minutes.

WHY ARE THEY EXPENSIVE?

Sunscreens are far more costly than ordinary moisturisers because the ingredients needed to make sunscreen products are expensive - as is the testing of the sunscreens. It takes a lot of work to measure the SPF of each product, and during the development stage you have to keep reformulating and re-testing. However regulations demand that skin is equally protected against UV exposure whatever the price of the product.

WHEN DOES THE SUN DO THE MOST DAMAGE?

UV exposure is at its highest when the sun is high in the sky (between 11am and 3pm), and it is this aspect of the midday sun - rather than the heat - that causes burning. It can even be raining, but in the summer months you still get exposed to UV radiation. Outside of those hours, and because the UV exposure is less when the sun is lower, the atmosphere automatically provides an SPF of about 10.

KEY INGREDIENTS

Proffessor Nicholas Lowe says: 'There are some good, more photostable sunscreen ingredients you should look out for on bottles.'

UV-ABSORBERS

Butylmethoxydibenzoyl-methane (also known as avoben-zone) - UVA. Octylmethoxy cinnamate -UVB nOctocrylene - UVB. Methylbenzylidene camphor - UVB.

UV REFLECTORS:

These reflect both UVA and UVB, but the exact performance can can vary and depends on the particle size used. Titanium dioxide. Zinc oxide.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

