TITLE	How broccoli helps you combat cancer

Last updated at 09:19 08 February 2006

Broccoli, cauliflower and cabbage can help beat cancer - and now scientists believe they have found out why. Research shows that chemicals found in the vegetables can boost DNA repair in cells to prevent them creating tumours.

A naturally - occurring compound called I3C, found in brassica vegetables such as brussels sprouts and others, and a chemical called genistein - found in soy beans - both increase the levels of vital DNA repair proteins in cancer cells.

Previous studies have suggested a link between eating such vegetables and protection against cancer.

But the latest research puts forward a molecular mechanism on how they might work, according to the British Journal of Cancer.

Professor Eliot Rosen from Georgetown University in Washington DC, who led the study, said: "Studies monitoring people's diets and their health have found links between certain types of food and cancer risk.

"However, before we can say a food protects against cancer we have to understand how it does this at a molecular level." Repair proteins regulated by genes, called BRCA1 and BRCA2, are important for preventing damaged genetic information being passed on to the next generation of cells.

If people have a faulty BRCA gene, they are at a higher risk of developing some forms of cancer - including breast, ovarian and prostate. Since decreased amounts of the BRCA proteins are seen in cancer cells, higher levels could prevent cancer developing.

Protective effect

The ability of I3C and genistein to boost the amount of BRCA proteins could explain their protective effects. Professor Rosen's research group had already shown that some natural chemicals in food increased levels of BRCA1. Their latest tests revealed that the two compounds they studied both acted on BRCA1 and BRCA2.

Professor Rosen said: "It's now clear the function of crucial cancer genes can be influenced by compounds in the things we eat. Our findings suggest a clear molecular process that would explain the connection between diet and cancer prevention."

Professor John Toy, medical director of Cancer Research UK, said: "Diet's role in cancer prevention is complex. This research explores an interesting hypothesis as to how certain components of diet can affect cancer risk.

"The evidence is building that these chemical compounds act on some of the genes inside cells that help prevent cancer developing.

"We still don't know if this is exactly how these chemicals might act in every day life. Cancer Research UK's Reduce the Risk campaign, however, is based on what we do know - including the fact that eating a balanced diet high in fibre and with plenty of fruit and vegetables lowers the risks of developing many forms of cancer."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

