TITLE	Could antiperspirants cause breast cancer?

By JAYNE ATHERTON, Metro

Last updated at 13:42 01 March 2006

A breast cancer expert is calling for more research into whether using antiperspirants increases the risk of developing the disease.

Dr Philippa Darbre warned there could be a link because of the aluminium salts used in deodorants.

She said here was mounting evidence that aluminium could break through the skin, particularly after armpits are shaved, and once in the body it could mimic the hormone oestrogen.

Chemicals that imitate oestrogen are known to affect a woman's risk of breast cancer, Dr Darbre added.

She called for further research into the issue, particularly when antiperspirants were sprayed near breasts.

An aluminium-based compound often makes up a quarter of the active ingredients which prevent sweating.

Dr Darbre, a researcher at the University of Reading, said: "It is reasonable to question whether this aluminium could then influence breast cancer."

'No proven link'

But Liz Carroll, head of clinical services at charity Breast Cancer Care, warned: "Studies to date have found no proven link between the use of deodorants and the risk of developing breast cancer.

"More research is needed to enable people to make a more informed decision about deodorant use."

There were also concerns about potential links between smoking and breast cancer, Dr Darbre said.

Tobacco introduces cadmium into the body and research shows it can collect in breast tissue. Like aluminium, it could also be mimicking oestrogen.

She said: "Each of these agents on their own may not have a powerful effect but we need to see what happens when a number of them act together - it could be that this would have a significant effect on diseases like breast cancer."

Dr Darbre's research is published in the latest issue of the Journal of Applied Toxicology.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

