TITLE	Oliver's Artful Dodger dies

Last updated at 11:53 02 March 2006

Jack Wild, the actor who played the Artful Dodger in the 1968 film Oliver, died last night after a battle with cancer, his agent announced today.

Wild blamed his mouth cancer on a lifestyle of heavy smoking and drinking, saying it had made him a "walking time bomb" for mouth cancer.

He was given the all-clear following surgery, in which he had his tongue and voicebox removed.

Despite not being able to speak, Wild still performed in panto, and his wife, Claire Harding, would lip read and speak for the Oliver! star. Last year he worked with Cancer Research UK to urge others to be aware of the risk factors and know the symptoms of the disease.

He said he spent the "70s and 80s in a drunken haze" but had been sober for 16 years.

"Until I was diagnosed with mouth cancer, I'd never heard of it. My lifestyle had made me a walking timebomb," he said.

"I was a heavy smoker and an even heavier drinker and apparently together they are a deadly mixture."

Wild was born on September 30 1952 in Royton, near Oldham, Lancs.

He was discovered by talent agent June Collins, mother of rock star Phil Collins, while playing football.

After attending stage school, his breakthrough came when he landed the role of Oliver in the London stage production of the show.

He then joined hundreds of other members of the cast at the audition for the film.

His performance as the infamous pickpocket in Oliver!, starring Oliver Reed, resulted in an Oscar nomination for best supporting actor.

His success in Oliver! helped him win the lead role in US children's series HR Pufnstuf.

HR Pufnstuf (1969) featured Wild with puppets and actors in elaborate costumes as a marooned boy in an enchanted land.

The success of the programme led to Wild reprising the role of Jimmy for the film version in 1970.

Other roles followed, including a starring role in Alan Parker's first film Melody (1971), and Flight Of The Doves in the same year.

Wild became a teen idol, releasing three albums, The Jack Wild Album, Everything's Coming up Roses, and Beautiful World.

But by the age of 21 he was an alcoholic, was diagnosed diabetic and fell from showbiz favour.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

