TITLE	Staying healthy with a vegetable diet makeover

Eating five portions of fruit and veg every day drastically reduces your risk of cancer and heart disease and helps you maintain a healthy weight. Yet the average Briton only eats three pieces.

Check out our tasty recipes from the NHS's 5ADAY which will make your mouth water...

Stuffed peppers

Click on the pepper to see the meal makeover!

Cut the top off a whole pepper, mix cooked rice with tomato puree, peas and sweetcorn and stuff inside the pepper.

Put the top back on again like a lid, and bake in the oven for 30 minutes.

You could also: Try roasting some peppers and adding to salads.

Guacomole

See the meal makeover!

Mash two peeled avocados. Add a finely chopped clove of garlic.

Mix in the juice of one lime and one tablespoon of extra virgin olive oil. Stir in a finely chopped tomato and a chilli if you like your dip hot!

It is ideal for dipping parsnip chips.

You could also: Use it as a baked potato filling.

Parsnip chips

See the meal makeover!

Parsnips are packed with vitamins and although they tend to be overlooked when it comes to writing the shopping list they can be a surprisingly quick and tasty alternative to chips.

Peel thick slices of parsnips. Sprinkle with a little salt and olive oil and bake in the oven for 20 minutes.

You could also: Make a parsnip soup with onion, garlic and vegetable stock.

Spring green spaghetti

See the meal makeover!

Pile all the leaves together and on top of each other. Don't discard the outer leaves - they have the best colour. Then get a big knife and shred the layers into thin strips.

Cook in boiling water (an inch should do it) for no more than 5-6 minutes.

When done drain and serve - mix with real spaghetti or tagliatelli for a two-tone effect

You could also: Slice into strips and add to soups.

Cauliflower mash

See the meal makeover!

Boil up some cauliflower florets, then mash in the same way you mash potatoes. Serve instead of or mixed with mashed potato.

You could also use some broccoli to add colour.

You could also: Try cold cauliflower salad.

 

For more fruit and veg information visit www.5aday.nhs.uk

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

