TITLE	Do we still need a daily dose of cod liver oil?

By ANGELA EPSTEIN, Daily Mail

Last updated at 14:32 21 March 2006

Fears about the safety of cod liver oil supplements were raised last week when batches of the tablets were withdrawn from shops after it found they had been contaminated with cancer-causing chemicals.

The move shocked regular users of a product historically used as a remedy for aching joints and rick-ets in malnourished children, and revealed as a rich source of essential fatty acids in the 1950s.

Here we answer the key questions about cod liver oil...

What are Omega-3s?

Fatty acids are now referred to as Omega-3s and are converted into two important Omega-3 fats: eicos-apentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA).

Since the body cannot manufacture its own supply, it has to get its source of these acids directly from food, most notably from fish.

The body needs Omega-3s for skin and tissue repair and nerve and immune system function. And they also play a part in allowing nutrients and other chemicals to pass in and out of cells.

According to Professor Basant Puri at Hammersmith Hospital in London, a lack of Omega-3s can lead to dry skin, dandruff, flaking nails and low energy levels.

Cod liver oil ? which as its name suggests is extracted from cod livers ? is also a source of Vitamin A, which is essential for the immune system, as well as Vitamin D, which is required for bone growth and health.

Can cod liver oil help with health conditions?

Scientists at Cardiff University have found that cod liver oil is effective in easing the discomfort of arthritis. This is due to the Omega-3' s ability to 'switch off' an enzyme called cyclooxygenase-2 that causes much of the pain and inflammation in the condition.

Regular intake can also reduce the risk of heart disease, as cod liver oil reduces the risk of blood clots, and lower blood pressure.

Do children need a daily dose of cod liver oil?

During World War II, children were given cod liver oil to supplement their meagre diets.

However, according to Anna Denny, a nutrition scientist with the British Nutrition Foundation, it is much better for children to get Omega-3 oils from eating fish.

This is because cod liver oil contains too much Vitamin A and D for a child's needs and high doses can be toxic.

How does it differ from other fish supplements?

Cod liver oil is made from the liver of a cod whereas most fish oil supplements are made from the fleshy part of oily fish. These oily varieties, such as herring and mackerel, are particularly rich in Omega-3. An adult needs about 1g to 2g of Omega-3 fatty acids, which can be provided by a 100g portion of herring.

Does it help children to learn?

More and more studies are offer-ing encouraging results to suggest that fish oils can improve children's concentration.

Recent research has highlighted the specific benefits to the brain of the fatty acids in fish, particularly in children with behavioural or learning difficulties.

This is because in conditions such as autism, the brain needs more fatty acids than normal. Fatty acids also improve blood flow to the brain, which may help concentration.

Do I have to eat fish if I take cod liver oil?

According to Anna Denny, cod liver oil in its pure form contains more essential fatty acids per 100g than the flesh of oily fish.

But because you are unlikely to take more than a couple of tea-spoons of cod liver oil, you could get far more EFAs by having a regular 140g portion of oily fish.

The government recommends eating at least one portion of white fish, such as cod, and one portion of oily fish, such as mack-erel, a week. Keeping to this intake should rule out the need for a supplement.

What is the best way to take it?

According to Pamela Mason, of the Health Supplement Information Service, it is easier to take a higher dose of cod liver oil in a liquid rather than a capsule.

A typical capsule may contain 300mg of essential fatty acids, whereas two 5ml teaspoons could give you as much as 2,000mg.

Experts recommend a daily intake of 650mg of long chain Omega-3 polyunsaturates (DHA and EPA combined), of which at least 300mg should be DHA.

Are the fears about cod liver oil justified?

Manufacturer Seven Seas has recalled a number of its products because they were found to contain dioxins above the legal limit. These are by-products of industrial processes which are usually removed by health supplement manufacturers.

Though they have no immediate effect on human health, they can cause health risks if they are absorbed at high levels for long periods. The chemicals have been linked to cancer and are also thought to harm unborn babies and the immune system.

However, some health experts have expressed concern about the toxin levels in cod liver oil, warning it may contain pollutants and toxins which have been ingested by the fish in the sea.

An alternative is VegEpa in which only the Omega-3 fatty acids have been extracted from fish oil and distilled into their purest form.

Should anyone avoid cod liver oil?

Pregnant women should be wary when taking supplements.

Though the DHA essential fatty acids will help with eye and brain formation in an unborn baby, cod liver oil also contains Vitamin A, which some experts say can be harmful to the foetus during the first three months of pregnancy.

Pregnant women should there-fore not exceed the recommended daily intake for Vitamin A, which is 0.6mg.

Some studies have suggested cod liver oil can raise blood sugar levels, so diabetics should consult their doctor before taking it.

It should also be avoided if you use a blood-thinning drug such as Warfarin, as the combined anti-clotting effect of the cod liver oil and the medication could be risky.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

