TITLE	Super pill to cut cancer and end PMT

By JULIE WHELDON, Daily Mail

Last updated at 12:05 28 March 2006

A new contraceptive pill that can cut the risk of breast cancer could be on the market in the next five years, scientists claim.

The pill works by stopping periods and could signal an end to the symptoms of pre-menstrual tension.

It could also help women suffering from conditions like endometriosis and cut the risk of thrombosis in those who are older, overweight and who smoke.

The current combined pill, which is used by more than two million women in the UK, carries an increased risk of breast cancer.

It is made up of the hormones oestrogen and progesterone, with the progesterone believed to lead to increased cancer risk.

The new pill works by blocking the effects of progesterone and is based on compounds used in the abortion pill, RU486.

The new pill works with much lower doses than in RU486 and blocks progesterone before a pregnancy even occurs.

David Baird, professor of reproductive endocrinology at the University of Edinburgh, who is leading the research, said current animal tests showed that the pill inhibits the introduction of breast cancer.

He added: "On theoretical grounds, there is no reason to suspect that this should increase the risk of breast cancer, in fact, it might even decrease it.

"The same is not true for the combined pill, which in theoretical and epidemiology studies increases the risk of breast cancer.

"Women who don't take any pills have quite a high risk of developing breast cancer.

"A lot of factors contribute to that - one is that they have repeated monthly cycles.

"If you reduce the cyclical exposure of the ovary to the ovarian hormones oestrogen and progesterone, you should reduce the risk of breast cancer."

Professor Baird said larger-scale studies were needed to examine the full benefits of the new pill as well as any possible side effects.

But he said the pill had been tried on two groups of around 90 women with positive results and very few side effects.

The pill is one of a group of progesterone receptor modulators that block the effects of progesterone - a hormone that prepares the body for pregnancy.

Early findings in patients with advanced breast cancer had also suggested that the compounds used "may be helpful", Professor Baird said.

Jeremy Hughes, chief executive of the charity Breakthrough Breast Cancer, said it was "too early" to say what effect the new pill will have on breast cancer risk.

He added: "Large, long-term studies are needed in order to determine the effects, if any.

"Women who currently take the contraceptive pill have a slightly increased risk of breast cancer.

"However breast cancer in women under 40 is rare, whether they use the pill or not.

"It's important to keep in mind that the pill offers benefits, like preventing unplanned pregnancies and reducing the risk of ovarian and endometrial cancer."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

