TITLE	Frying can increase cancer risk

By FIONA MACRAE, Daily Mail

Last updated at 09:00 10 April 2006

Exposure to cooking oil used to fry chips can increase your risk of cancer, research has revealed.

Scientists say potentially harmful particles are released into the air when oil is heated to the temperatures needed to cook chips or stir-fries.

Repeated exposure to these chemicals can increase the chance of diseases such as lung, breast and bladder cancer.

All cooking oils produce the particles but vegetable oil is the most dangerous. Corn oil and olive oil also pose a risk, researchers say.

Deep-frying chips, in particular, produces large amounts of the cancer-causing chemicals - polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.

It also produces the compound acrylamide, another carcinogenic chemical.

The study, published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, estimates that someone regularly exposed to high levels of these chemicals would have a one in 100 chance of developing cancer.

Last night the researchers advised cooks to make sure kitchens are properly ventilated - and to try to boil and steam foods instead of frying.

They said: "It is highly possible for cooks to be exposed to harmful particles even while cooking at home.

"It is advantageous to carry out cooking activities in well-ventilated kitchens - either mechanically or naturally ventilated. Exposure could be minimised by installing an effective fume-extractor over a gas stove.

"Water-based cooking methods, such as steaming and boiling, rather than cooking with oil, could further improve air quality, especially in confined environments."

The team from the University of Singapore compared methods of Malaysian, Chinese and Indian cooking.

Their study, published in the Journal of Environmental Monitoring, analysed the quality of the air in the kitchens of three food stalls.

According to scientists, the deep-frying done by the Malaysian chefs released more polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons than the stir-frying in the Chinese kitchens.

At the Indian food stall, much of the food was simmered or boiled, which cut down on the hydrocarbons.

The chemicals, also found in tobacco smoke and exhaust fumes, are released when oil is heated to high temperatures.

Researcher Dr Rajasekhar Balasubramanian said: "A comparison of the different cooking methods implies that deep-frying generates more polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons than any other cooking method, which could be due to the higher temperature maintained during cooking and the larger amount of oil used in deep-frying."

"The Malay stall fried mostly starchy foods," he said. "It is highly likely that the deep-frying of chips will also produce large amounts of hydrocarbons, just like the Malay food stall."

Cancer charities last night advised people to cut down on fried food.

Josephine Querido, of Cancer Research UK, said: "Heating cooking oil to very high temperatures can release chemicals into the air.

"But the level of chemicals in the fumes caused by cooking in the home is very small and there is no evidence to show this could increase cancer risk.

"The best way to reduce cancer risk is to eat a balanced diet including plenty of fruit and vegetables and avoid too much red and processed meats. Poaching or grilling rather than frying food helps to cut down on fats."

The British Nutrition Foundation said there were numerous reasons to eat less fried food.

Nutrition scientist Rebecca Foster said: "A high-fat diet increases the risk of high cholesterol which, in turn, can increase the risk of coronary heart disease.

"Fat also has a high calorie content, which can increase the risk of gaining weight and increase the risk of heart disease, diabetes and cancer."

The research follows a warning last year that giving children chips could dramatically increase the chance of breast cancer.

A team from Harvard Medical School said giving under-fives one portion of chips a week increases their risk by 27 per cent. They also suggested the fat in which chips are fried can cause cancer.

Lung cancer kills more men and women in the UK each year than any other type of cancer. Each year, it claims more than 33,000 lives.

About 41,000 British women are diagnosed with breast cancer each year and 13,000 die from it. Bladder cancer kills 5,000 a year.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

