TITLE	Contraceptive pill may protect against bowel cancer

Taking the contraceptive pill may protect women against bowel cancer, scientists said today.

A study indicates that the Pill may reduce the risk of suffering the disease by up to 20%.

The research, led by Dr Carlo La Vecchia from the Institute of Pharmacological Research in Milan, pooled the results of 19 international studies looking at bowel cancer rates for women who had taken an oral contraceptive between the mid 1960s and 1980s.

The findings were published in the British Journal of Cancer to coincide with Bowel Cancer Awareness Month.

Death rates for bowel cancer were already known to have dropped more in women than in men over the past two decades. Scientists suspected that this was probably because of the effect of hormones in the Pill.

Dr La Vecchia said: "For a while now we have suspected oestrogen in the Pill could protect against bowel cancer and our research has gone some way to confirm this.

"Mortality rates for female bowel cancer have steadily dropped over the last 20 years - we believe this is partly due to the Pill.

"In the future, it may be possible to develop new treatments that take advantage of the anti-cancer qualities of the Pill."

Researchers believe the trend can be explained by the way the female hormone oestrogen works in the body.

Oestrogen reduces levels of bile acids, which have been linked to colon cancer.

It may also help reduce levels of a growth factor hormone called IGF-1 that has also been linked to the disease.

IGF-1 is found in the blood and instructs cells to divide. But excess amounts of the hormone can make the cells divide too quickly.

Women who had stopped using oral contraceptives within the last 10 years of the research period were more protected than those who had been without the Pill for longer.

Prof Gordon McVie, director general of the Cancer Research Campaign, said: "The results show that women might have a secret weapon against the disease that kills 46 people in the UK each day.

"In future, it might be possible for scientists to harness the anti-cancer properties of the Pill to help combat the UK's second biggest killer cancer."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

