TITLE	'Tomatoes are lifesavers'

By MARTYN HALLE, Daily Mail

Last updated at 12:17 16 May 2006

Scientists have found a substance in tomatoes that can help prevent heart attacks and strokes. It works by helping to stop blood becoming sticky and forming clots that can cause potentially blockages in arteries and veins.

The lycopene which gives tomatoes their red colour is known to protect against various cancers. The anti-clotting properties are found in the yellow fluid surrounding the seeds.

In clinical trials published in the journal Platelet, it was found that the stickiness of platelets - the particles in blood that cause clotting - was reduced by 70 per cent when 220 volunteers had a drink containing the tomato extract.

Blood platelets are vital for helping wounds heal after an accident or surgery, but if they become too sticky, then they bind together, which can stop the free flow of blood.

Tomatoes 'improved blood flow'

The tomato substance reduces the stickiness of platelets so they flow smoothly through blood vessels, reducing the risk of a blockage occurring.

Up to 50,000 people a year die as a result of clots caused by a buildup of platelets. Those most at risk are people who have already had a heart attack or stroke, smokers, women on the Pill, long-distance air travellers, the long-term sick and pregnant women.

Research has shown that the anti-clotting substance in the drink has no detrimental effect on the natural clotting process. Nor does it cause the side-effects, such as gastric problems, often associated with blood-thinning drugs.

Life-threatening clot

Fiona Hughes, 33, mother of Matilda, four, and Jack, five months, from Fulham, South-West London, drinks the supplement because she suffered a potentially life-threatening clot on a lung at the age of 28.

"I had just come back from a weekend in Dublin when I felt a crushing pain in my ribs," she says. "I also felt breathless. I went to my GP, who suspected I had developed a blood clot in my chest.

"He referred me to Charing Cross Hospital in London, where the diagnosis was confirmed by injecting a dye into my bloodstream and doing a scan.

"The clot showed up clearly. They started pumping the drug warfarin into me to dissolve it. I was in hospital for nine days.

Fortunately, I was well enough for my wedding to go ahead three weeks later, but I remained on warfarin for the next nine months.

"The doctors at Charing Cross discovered I had a blood disorder that was more likely to make my blood clot - but that disappeared mysteriously when I became pregnant with my first child."

Today, Fiona buys the drink for reassurance. "If it helps keep my blood flowing, that's great," she says.

Dr Tony Leeds, a hospital consultant and nutritionist at King's College, London, says: "If you're at risk of having clots, or have had one, then you might well be on medication and you should always follow your doctor's advice.

"But there are a lot of people who are at risk but don't know it. If something as simple as a drink can help prevent a clot, then it's a good idea. You could, of course, get the same effect from eating tomatoes regularly."

Tomato extract

The tomato extract, called Fruit-flow, is in a range of juices by Sirco that have been endorsed by the charity Heart UK.

"Everyone is familiar with cholesterol being bad for your heart, but the role of blood clots and blood health is less clear to people," says Sirco director Michael Livingston.

"It is the blood clot caused by platelet aggregation that causes many heart attacks and strokes."

SIRCO juices are available from selected branches of Tesco, Sainsbury's and Waitrose.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

