TITLE	Can the right diet prevent breast cancer?

By DR MICHELLE HARVIE, Daily Mail

Last updated at 11:35 16 May 2006

The spectre of breast cancer strikes fear into women all over the world - and in Britain rates are staggeringly high. One in nine women is likely to develop the disease and, though survival rates are improving and scientists continue to develop drugs to prolong life, women in Britain die from it every year.

So why are women in this country so prone to the disease? Contrary to popular belief, just five per cent of those who develop breast cancer have a hereditary link to the disease.

And environmental factors such as pollution are thought to be a small influence on risk.

The consensus among scientists is that a huge number of cases ? about 90 per cent ? are caused by a person's lifestyle and that, by eating the right foods, women can reduce dramatically the risk of developing the disease.

According to Dr Michelle Harvie, a leading research dietician based at South Manchester University Hospital, who has researched the impact of nutrition on breast cancer and written a book on the topic, it is vital to start acting now, regardless of age.

Breast cancer may be most common in those over 50, but a tumour can take more than 20 years to develop. This means that many women in their 20s and 30s may already have, or be at risk of, precancerous growths in their body.

Dr Harvie, whose work is funded by the Genesis Appeal, a charity dedicated to building Europe's first breast cancer prevention centre in Britain, says eating the right food is a simple and potentially life-saving move if you want to reduce your risk of breast cancer.

FITNESS

Losing weight can significantly decrease your risk of breast cancer. Heavier women have higher levels of cancer-promoting hormones, such as oestrogen and insulin, in their bodies. This means the hormones are more likely to be taken up by breast cells where they can stimulate cancer growth.

The large fat cells in heavier women also release great amounts of cancer-promoting substances, such as the hormone leptin, into the bloodstream. Weight loss seems to correct these imbalances.

Women whose weight remains steady, or those who lose at least half a stone, between the ages of 30 and 50 have 40 per cent less risk of cancer than women who gain weight.

Research has shown that breast cancer risk is 30 to 40 per cent lower among women who take regular exercise. To prevent breast cancer, take 30 to 45 minutes of moderate exercise five times a week.

SUPPLEMENTS

There is no such thing as a quick fix of nutritional supplements to stave off the risk of breast cancer. Being deficient in nutrients such as vitamins C, D, E and A as well as calcium and selenium can increase risk. But large doses of these nutrients, in excess of daily requirements, do not lower the risk of cancer.

In fact, high doses of vitamin C (more than 1g a day) may damage genes in cells, which could promote cancer.

TO BE SAFE:

It is better to get your nutrients from foods rather than supplements. If you do take tablets, keep within recommended limits. Care should be taken with high doses of zinc because this can damage DNA, which can be the first step in the development of cancer.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

