TITLE	The Pill: A secret weapon against cancer

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Women who take the Pill could be gaining protection from bowel cancer.

Research suggests that users are up to 20 per cent less likely to develop the disease.

Scientists claim the beneficial effect of hormones in oral contraceptives could explain why rates of the disease have fallen more in women than men in the last two decades. One expert said that the Pill could be a 'secret weapon' for women.

Bowel cancer is Britain's second-biggest killer cancer after lung tumours. Around 34,000 people develop the disease each year, with women accounting for slightly less than half of all cases.

A new review of 19 international studies compared bowel cancer rates for women who had taken an oral contraceptive between the mid-1960s and 1980s.

They found that as more women took the Pill and for longer periods of time, incidence rates of the disease fell.

The finding is the latest to show the beneficial effects of the Pill for up to three million British users. Previous research shows they have a reduced chance of dying of cancer of the ovaries and womb lining and suffering conditions such as osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and a range of gynaecological and breast problems.

On the other hand there is a very small rise in the average risk from heart disease, stroke, breast and cervical cancer.

The new study led by Dr Carlo La Vecchia from the Institute of Pharmacological Research in Milan is published today in the British Journal of Cancer to coincide with Bowel Cancer Awarenesss Month.

Dr La Vecchia says: 'For a while we have suspected oestrogen in the Pill could protect against bowel cancer and our research has gone some way to confirm this.

'It may be possible to develop new treatments in the future based on this finding.'

He said rates of female bowel cancer have steadily dropped over the last 20 years partly due to the Pill.

The explanation lies in the way the female hormone oestrogen works in the body, he said.

When oestrogen in the contraceptive is released into the body, it blocks the growth of cancer cells by reducing the amount of bile acids, which have been linked to colon cancer.

The oestrogen may also help to reduce levels of a hormone called IGF-1, which has also been linked to an increased risk of bowel cancer.

IGF-1 is found in the blood and instructs cells to divide. But when the body produces too much of this hormone, these cells divide too quickly and can contribute to cancer development.

Dr La Vecchia said the results suggested protection was stronger for women who had stopped using oral contraceptives within the last ten years of the research period, compared with those who had stopped taking the Pill for longer.

Professor Gordon McVie, director general of the Cancer Research Campaign, said: 'The results show that women might have a secret weapon against the disease that kills 46 people in the UK each day.'

Dr Anne Szarewski, senior clinical research fellow with the Imperial Cancer Research Fund and an expert on the Pill, said: 'This study adds to the well-documented health benefits of the Pill.

'We've known for some time that the pill provides a roughly 50 per cent reduction in risk from both ovarian and endometrial cancer and that this protection lasts at least ten years after you stop taking it.

'If, as this research suggests, there is also a 20 per cent reduction in the risk of women developing colorectal cancer, it would potentially prevent about 3,300 cases a year in the UK.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

