TITLE	Cancer fears over chocolate and snacks

Last updated at 17:39 17 May 2006

Chocolates and bagged snacks are being pulled from shop shelves after potential cancer-causing toxins were found in a batch of rice flour.

Smiths Flour Mills, a subsidiary of Northern Foods, discovered the contamination during routine testing.

Three brands of products are being recalled because aflatoxin B1 was found at levels above the legal limit, the Food Standards Agency (FSA) said. This occurs naturally in mould but has been shown to cause cancer in animals.

The affected products are Quaker Caribbean Chicken Seasons, Sainsbury's Chocolate and Toffee Crispie Bites and Smiths Bacon Fries. Only batches with specific sell-by dates are being recalled.

It is thought the contaminated rice originated in Pakistan and was imported into the UK from Sweden.

A FSA spokesman said: "The risk from occasionally eating small amounts of aflatoxins is likely to be very small. However, we want to keep people's exposure as low as possible."

The company reported it to the FSA and stopped any more flour from the affected batches entering the food chain.

A FSA spokesman added: "The Agency has requested companies to recall any products where the levels of aflatoxins in the final product would exceed the legal limit."

The legal limit in rice and processed products containing rice is two parts per billion.

Rice flour is used in food production as a thickener or to produce the crispy texture in products such cereals and crackers. It also makes the crisped rice used in some chocolate bars.

Affected products:

Quaker Caribbean Chicken Seasons - sold in single 28g packs and multipacks of four 25g packs - with best before date: 02-09-06

Sainsbury's 18 Chocolate  and  Toffee Crispie Bites - 216g pack with best before dates: 18-08-06 and 27-08-06.

Smiths Bacon Fries - sold on display cards with 24 packs (25g per pack) with best before dates: 09-09-06, 16-09-06, 23-09-06 

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

