TITLE	Folic acid 'could stop early cancer progression'

Last updated at 12:25 12 June 2006

Taking folic acid may help stop the progression of early signs of cancer and even promote regression, experts have announced.

Researchers found that people given folic acid supplements saw a reduction in the size of pre-cancerous lesions.

The small study, published in the journal Cancer, found that 31 out of 43 patients with early symptoms of possible cancer of the larynx had a 50 per cent or more reduction in their lesions after six months of taking folic acid. In 12 of the 31 people, there was no evidence of the original lesion after six months.

The experts said the study added to the theory that a lack of folic acid could be a risk factor for the progression of cancer.

Folate is a naturally occurring B vitamin found in fresh vegetables and fruits. Its synthetic form is folic acid, found in dietary supplements and added to some foods. It is regularly used by women before and during the early stages of pregnancy to support the growth of the baby.

It plays an important role in creating and repairing DNA and converting the amino acid homocysteine into methionine.

High homocysteine levels have been linked to a number of health problems, including heart disease, some cancers and dementia, the researchers said.

Hazel Nunn, cancer information officer at Cancer Research UK, said: "Folate is one of a number of vitamins which may help protect against cancer.

"This small study of people with a pre-cancerous condition of the larynx adds to the evidence, but we cannot be sure that the folate supplements caused their lesions to shrink.

"The best way to obtain a range of potentially cancer-protective nutrients is to eat a healthy balanced diet including plenty of fruit and vegetables of different colours, rather than taking supplements."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

