TITLE	Mammograms 'can increase breast cancer risk'

Last updated at 01:00 27 June 2006

Mammograms may increase the risk of breast cancer in women with a genetic predisposition to the disease, researchers revealed today.

A study of 1,600 women with BRCA 1 and 2 mutations, defective genes linked to breast cancer, found they were 54 per cent more likely to suffer the disease if they had ever had a chest X-ray.

For women given chest X-rays before the age of 20, the risk of developing breast cancer before their 40th birthday more than doubled.

Dr David Goldgar, who led the investigation while heading the Genetic Epidemiology Group at the International Agency for Research on Cancer in Lyon, France, said: "This is one of the first studies to demonstrate that women genetically predisposed to breast cancer may be more susceptible to low-dose ionising radiation than other women.

"If confirmed in prospective studies, young women who are members of families known to have BRCA 1 or BRCA 21 mutations may wish to consider alternatives to X-rays, such as MRI (magnetic resonance imaging)."

BRCA 1 and 2 are both genes that make proteins involved in repairing damage to DNA in breast cells.

X-rays disrupt DNA, but as long as the radiation dose is not too high, the damage is naturally repaired. Cancer cells do not have the same self-repair ability, which is why X-rays are used in radiotherapy to destroy cancer.

Dr Goldgar added: "Since BRCA proteins are integral in repairing damage to breast cells, we hypothesised that women with BRCA 1/2 mutations would be less able to repair damage caused to DNA by ionising radiation. Our findings support this hypothesis and stress the need for prospective studies."

The researchers analysed questionnaires completed by more than 1,600 women taking part in the International BRCA 1/2 Carrier Cohort Study (IBCCS) - a major European investigation of women with BRCA mutations.

While all the women carried the mutations, not all developed breast cancer.

The women were asked whether they had ever had chest X-rays, and if so, whether it was before or after the age of 20.

The findings were published today in the Journal of Clinical Oncology.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

