TITLE	Smoking age could be raised to 18

Last updated at 09:44 03 July 2006

Under-18s could be banned from buying cigarettes under proposals being put to the public today in a bid to cut cancer deaths.

A consultation is being launched by the Department of Health seeking views on whether the limit should be raised by one year or two - or stay at 16.

More here...

And shops that are found to be regularly flouting the rules could be stopped from selling cigarettes altogether under proposals for more vigorous enforcement action.

The public will have three months to give its verdict on putting tobacco on the same footing as alcohol - the option believed to be backed by ministers.

Almost one in 10 11-15 year olds smokes - with someone taking up the habit at 15 three times more likely to die from smoking related cancer than someone starting in their 20s.

Most EU states - as well as the United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand - already ban under-18s.

Health Act

Powers to raise the age - set at 16 since 1908 - were contained in this year's Health Act.

Health Minister Caroline Flint said: "Smoking is dangerous at any age, but the younger people start, the more likely they are to become life-long smokers and to die early.

"Someone who starts smoking aged 15 is three times more likely to die of cancer due to smoking than someone who starts in their late 20s.

"Access to cigarettes by under 16s is not as difficult as it should be and this is partly due to retailers selling tobacco to those under the legal age."

She added: "If a particular shop is known locally as the place for children and teenagers to easily buy tobacco, we want to stop that shop selling it."

The Department of Health believes that as well as highlighting the dangers, a higher limit would make it easier for retailers to spot under-age buyers.

An official survey found that 17 per cent of 11-15 year olds tried to buy cigarettes from shops with only 23 per cent of those finding it hard to get served.

Fines for prosecuted shopkeepers tend to be small meaning many, the Department believes, are happy to take the risk of being caught by Trading Standards

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

