TITLE	The truth, the mole truth

By SARAH STACEY, You Magazine

Last updated at 20:20 03 October 2007

One in four people who contract malignant melanoma die from it.

It's the most dangerous form of skin cancer, which is caused by over-exposure to UV radiation from the sun or sunbeds.

Fewer men than women are diagnosed with melanoma but significantly more chaps die than women because it's usually detected later, when it's more difficult to treat. And that figure is rising alarmingly, according to Cancer Research UK.

The number of men dying from melanoma is now more than 1,000 each year in the UK, a rise of nearly a third over ten years. Experts say that the thickness of a melanoma at diagnosis is very important in the outcome of the cancer and a major reason for men's poorer outlook is because many men fail to get their moles checked.

Melanoma is more likely to develop on a man's upper body due to their enthusiasm for taking their tops off in sunny weather (women's legs are more at risk).

One option is to go to an independent screening and diagnostic clinic (which doesn't need a doctor's referral) such as The Mole Clinic in London.

Dominick Peasley, 28, reports on his session there: 'I was a bit worried because I've sunbathed in strong sunshine on holiday for years.

'The nurse looked all over my body (I was in my boxers) and chose three moles, two on my arms and one on my chest, for closer examination because their edges were more ragged than the others and they had a higher concentration of pigment (melanin).

'An instrument, shaped like a hairdryer attached to a computer, focussed on the moles and they were each magnified three times. The images were fed into the computer, which analyses them on a scale of one to 10 - the most dangerous. Moles rated over 4.5 are recommended for treatment.

'Luckily my three moles all came back with a two, and were diagnosed as common flat navei. But I was reprimanded for sunbathing without putting on sun protection, and told to wear SPF 15 in the sun from now on.'

Our Features Editor Rosalind Lowe also had a check: 'I'm quite fair-skinned and haven't sunbathed a lot, but was concerned to get the raised moles on my upper arm and face checked out.

'The nurse thought these compound nevi, which I've had all my life, looked fine, but looked more carefully at the smattering of freckle-like moles (flat nevi) on my forearms, which I'd never paid any attention to myself.

'She explained that these tiny moles may have developed more recently as the result of sun exposure. They look 'obviously benign' at the moment but apparently this type of newer mole is more likely to become cancerous rather than the more obvious raised ones I'd inherited from my parents. So I will definitely be keeping an eye out of any changes in those.'

All patients are given a written report For appointments, which cost &pound;95, call 020 7734 1177; for information, www.themoleclinic.co.uk

Bringing up baby

I get piles of health and wellbeing books to read and the ones that stand out talk directly to the reader with warmth and authority.

The Baby Book by Rachel Waddilove, a maternity nurse and nanny, does just that. Gwynneth Paltrow credits Rachel's 'flexible yet structured schedule' for getting Apple (her first baby with Cold Play husband Chris Martin) to sleep through the night by six weeks old.

Consultant paediatrician John Tripp, who wrote the Foreword, recommends the emphasis on a warm and unconditionally loving environment balanced by a clear perspective as to who is in charge?

To have a copy of The Baby Book by Rachel Waddilove (published by Lion Hudson) delivered to your door for &pound;7.99 post free, contact the YOU Bookshop on 0870 162 5006, or visit www.you-bookshop.co.uk

Small Change Big Difference

Lots of readers testify to the power of MenoHerbs2 'natural HRT' to banish hot flushes and other menopausal symptoms. I'm a fully paid up fan. &pound;14.95 for six weeks supply. From Victoria Health.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

