TITLE	Mid-life weight warning on breast cancer

By JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Last updated at 11:14 09 August 2006

Women who gain even a moderate amount of weight later in life are more likely to develop breast cancer, a study has revealed.

Putting on a stone-and-a-half after the menopause pushes up the risk of developing the disease by 18 per cent, say researchers who monitored 87,000 women.

Losing weight, meanwhile, has the opposite effect.

Women who shed a stone-and-a-half in the years following the menopause - and keep the weight off - cut their risk of developing breast cancer by more than half, the U.S. team said.

The findings were held up yesterday as the first evidence that it is never too late to lose the pounds in order to avoid cancer, while maintaining a healthy weight throughout life goes even further in keeping cancer at bay.

There are 41,000 cases of the disease in the UK each year and 13,000 deaths.

Experts believe that expanding waistlines - more than two-thirds of British women are obese or overweight - could be partly to blame for record levels of breast cancer. The new study, reported today in the Journal of the American Medical Association, adds to the evidence and was the biggest of its kind.

Researchers at Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, assessed weight change for two different periods in the lives of women in the study - since the age of 18 and after the menopause.

Women who had gained 55lbs - almost four stones - since the age of 18 were at a 45 per cent increased risk of breast cancer, compared with those who maintained their weight.

Women who gained 22lbs - around a stone-and-a-half - following the menopause had an 18 per cent rise in breast cancer risk. Those who lost about 22lbs or more after the menopause - and kept the weight off - had a 57 per cent lower risk of breast cancer, compared with women who maintained the same weight.

Lead researcher Heather Eliassen said: 'Ours is the first study to show a significantly decreased risk with weight loss after menopause for women who maintained their loss.

'The trend of decreasing risk with more weight lost also was statistically significant. Our calculations suggest that weight gain since age 18 years and since menopause contributes substantially to the incidence of breast cancer, and many cases could be avoided by maintaining weight throughout adult life. Importantly, many breast cancer cases could also be avoided by weight loss after menopause.'

Dr Kat Arney, science information officer for Cancer Research UK, added: 'We know from previous research that the risk of breast cancer goes up if you are overweight after the menopause.

'This study goes further, and tells us that it's never too late to shift some pounds to reduce your risk of breast cancer.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

