TITLE	Weight gain after menopause 'increases breast cancer risk'

By JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Last updated at 21:00 11 July 2006

Women who gain a moderate amount of weight in later life are more likely to develop breast cancer, warn doctors.

Putting on a stone-and-a-half after the menopause pushes up the risk of developing the disease by 18 per cent, according to a massive study of 87,000 women.

More here...

But it found for the first time that successful slimmers can halve their chances of developing the disease, compared with older women who stay the same weight.

US researchers reporting the results today in the Journal of the American Medical Association (must credit) say it's never too late to drop the pounds in a bid to avoid cancer.

They claim many cases could be prevented if women maintained a healthy weight throughout life - or at least got rid of excess weight in their 50s.

In the UK, experts believe the ballooning of women's waistlines - with more than two-thirds of women obese or overweight - could be partly to blame for record levels of breast cancer.

There are 41,000 cases of breast cancer in the UK each year, and 13,000 deaths.

Four out of five cases are diagnosed in women after the menopause, around the age of 50 years, and the risk rises with increasing age.

Breast cancer has been linked with obesity in previous research, but the latest study is the biggest of its kind.

Researchers at Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, assessed weight change for two different periods - since 18 years and after the menopause - using data from the Nurses' Health Study.

Altogether 87,000 postmenopausal women, who were free of cancer, were followed for 26 years to assess weight change since the age of 18, while weight change since the menopause was assessed among 50,000 women.

Women who gained 55 pounds - almost four stones - since the age of 18 were at a 45 per cent increased risk of breast cancer, compared with those who maintained their weight.

Women who gained 22 pounds - around a stone and a half - since the menopause had an 18 per cent rise in breast cancer risk.

'Losing weight lowers risks'

Those who lost about 22 pounds or more since the menopause - and kept the weight off - had a 57 per cent lower risk of breast cancer, compared with women who maintained the same weight.

The researchers concluded that 15 per cent of the study's 4,393 breast cancer cases were caused by weight gain of 4.4 pounds or more since the age of 18.

Weight gain of 4.4 pounds or more since the menopause was probably responsible for 4.4 per cent of cancer cases, they said.

Lead researcher Heather Eliassen said: 'Ours is the first study to show a significantly decreased risk with weight loss after menopause for women who maintained their loss.

'The trend of decreasing risk with more weight lost also was statistically significant.

'Our calculations suggest that weight gain since age 18 years and since menopause contributes substantially to the incidence of breast cancer, and many cases could be avoided by maintaining weight throughout adult life.

'Importantly, many breast cancer cases also could be avoided by weight loss after menopause.'

She warned it would be an uphill struggle to cut the risk for thousands of women because so few manage to shed excess weight in later life.

'Women should avoid weight gain throughout adult life rather than count on losing weight after the menopause,' she added.

It is thought changes in sex hormone levels including a rise in oestrogen production linked to obesity could explain the increased risk of hormone-dependent cancers, like breast cancer, among obese patients.

In the case of breast cancer, oestrogen is still produced by the fat cells in postmenopausal women even when their ovaries are no longer doing so.

Overweight women have double the level of circulating oestrogen in their bodies as normal weight women.

After smoking, obesity is regarded as the biggest cause of a range of cancers and estimates show 26,000 cancer deaths could be avoided in the UK each year if adults maintained a healthy weight.

A Cancer Research UK conference found food and drink caused as many as 80,000 cases of cancer each year, with a third of the cases triggered by obesity and over-consumption of alcohol.

Previous US research suggested obese women who developed breast cancer were more at risk of dying.

Dr Kat Arney, Cancer Research UK science information officer, said: "We know from previous research that the risk of breast cancer goes up if you are overweight after the menopause.

"This study goes further, and tells us that it's never too late to shift some pounds to reduce your risk of breast cancer." Dr Emma Pennery, Nurse Consultant at Breast Cancer Care, said: 'This study adds to existing evidence that weight gain can increase a woman's chance of developing breast cancer, particularly if this extra weight is not lost before the menopause.

'Whilst risk rises with any weight gain it only becomes significant with excessive amounts.' Dr Sarah Rawlings from Breakthrough Breast Cancer said: 'Whether you have been through the menopause or not, being overweight is associated with a variety of health problems, including increased risk of heart disease, high blood pressure and several types of cancer.

'Maintaining a healthy weight throughout life can help reduce the risk of many diseases as well as promoting good health.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

