TITLE	Warning over suncream's skin cancer protection

Last updated at 00:08 18 July 2006

Rubbing suncream into the skin drastically reduces its effectiveness, experts have warned.

Protection against dangerous radiation linked to skin cancers and premature ageing is cut almost to zero.

The risk of damage can actually be increased because the cream still stops the skin burning, encouraging people to lie in the sun for longer.

The alarming research by the RAFT charity found that sunscreens work properly only if they are used in a thick 'buttery' layer.

The warning came with the country sweltering in a fierce heatwave which could see temperatures reach an all-time high of 102F (39C) today.

Dr Rachel Haywood, the senior scientist at RAFT, is calling for new advice for the public and a change in sunscreen testing methods.

She is particularly concerned that parents do not realise their children are being exposed to a cancer risk.

Britain has around 2,000 deaths a year from skin cancer and rates of the most lethal form, malignant melanoma, are rising sharply.

Dr Haywood said: "Evidence suggests that melanoma often originates through acute sunlight exposure in childhood. Suncreams are not sufficient. Youngsters should be covering up and staying in the shade."

But Boots, which makes the best-selling Soltan suntan cream, insisted it offers effective protection and questioned the validity of the test devised by RAFT. The charity's experts checked two types of radiation in sunlight - UVB, which causes the skin to redden and burn and UVA, which is associated with cancer and premature ageing.

Most suncreams offer protection against UVB using an SPF - Sun Protection Factor - rating. Some claim protection against UVA, indicated by a star rating.

The scientists measured the presence in skin of free radical chemicals, which are associated with damage to DNA and cancer.

They found levels of free radicals rose in direct relation to exposure to UVA rays, which penetrate deep into the skin.

Suncream offered little or no protection if it was rubbed in.

Dr Haywood, whose team is based at the Mount Vernon NHS hospital in Middlesex, said: "Most people prefer to rub the cream into the skin. They find it more pleasant and comfortable.

"However, our research shows for the first time that if the cream is rubbed in, the protection against free radical production is minimal.

'Sunscreens offer a false reassurance'

"The cream accumulates in lines and in sweat glands, rather than being spread evenly. As a result it doesn't cover the sensitive parts of the skin.

"Our research shows that the only real protection exists if you apply a buttery white film and let it dry on the surface of the skin."

The RAFT research also identified a rise in free radicals caused by visible light in sunshine.

Currently, no suncreams are designed to protect against this.

Dr Haywood said: "We are concerned that the incomplete protection offered by sunscreens is contributing to the rise in skin cancer. Sunscreens offer a false reassurance that you can stay out in the sunlight for long periods."

"We are also concerned that the public is not aware of the damaging effects of the different parts of the solar spectrum.

"People are reassured by sunscreens that have a high SPF rating. They believe this offers a protection against all biological damage. But the reality is that they offer only partial protection."

RAFT wants the EU to develop a standard suncream testing regime that is far more rigorous than the existing system.

The charity insisted it was not criticising manufacturers, who formulated their products on the basis of existing science. But it called on them to develop products which more effectively screen out the harmful effects of both UVA and visible light.

RAFT - Restoration of Appearance and Function Trust - was set up ten years ago by a group of consultant plastic surgeons to support research and education in the fields of reconstructive surgery and burn injury treatment.

Its team includes experts in cancer and burns who operate a sophisticated suncream testing regime using skin recovered from operations. Their findings on sunscreens are to be published in the respected scientific journal Photo-Chemistry  and  PhotoBiology.

But Mike Brown, Boots' suncare scientific adviser, questioned the results. He said: "We'd like to reassure people that when they buy a product with five star UVA protection it has been thoroughly tested and protects to the level it claims.

"Suncreams are designed to be rubbed in, and we do this when we test the protection Soltan gives. The RAFT test is in conflict with all other methodologies which show good quality sunscreens to be effective against UVA.

"Boots has actually funded work with RAFT, to look at their different methods of testing for UVA protection, however we are no longer working with them.

"While they have some interesting new theories on testing, we believe these are yet to be proved and prefer to continue using established methods approved by the EU."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

