TITLE	Sun creams: what you need to know

Last updated at 09:45 19 July 2006

Health experts have raised serious concerns about the safety of suncream, warning that people who rub it into their skin are putting themselves at greater risk of developing cancer.

Here, Daily Mail science reporter Fiona Macrae examines the dangers posed by exposure to the sun and explains how sunscreens work, what to look for when buying them and how best to use them.

The damage is done by UVA and UVB rays - two of the three types of ultra-violet light found in the sun's rays.

UVA and UVB rays both burn our skin. However, UVB is behind most cases of sunburn and the majority of skin cancers.

UVA penetrates the skin more deeply, causing it to lose its elasticity and age. It also causes the production of free radicals - dangerous chemicals linked to cancer.

Both UVA and UVB are thought to cause malignant melanoma - the most dangerous form of cancer. This affects 8,000 Britons a year and kills almost 1,800.

The third type of ultraviolet light, UVC, is absorbed by the atmosphere before it reaches Earth and so does not do us any harm.

Sunscreens - which can be bought as either creams, milks, oils and sprays - prevent UV light from causing damage by reflecting and absorbing it before it penetrates our skin.

The contain tiny crystals which scatter the dangerous rays and bounce them back.

Other chemicals absorb the UV rays and convert them into less-harmful infra-red rays.

Most sunscreens protect against UVA and UVB, however some provide better protection against UVA than others.

All sunscreens have an SPF (sun protection factor) rating which indicates the amount of protection the sunscreen gives from burning.

If you use a factor 10, you should be able to sit in the sun without burning ten times longer than if you weren't using any sunscreen.

The higher the factor, the higher the protection. However, no sunscreen gives complete protection.

The SPF mainly refers to protection against UVB. To find out how well the cream works against UV look for its 'star' rating. Those with four or five stars provide the best protection.

Experts recommend that we use 20ml of sunscreen per square metre of skin. This equates to almost four tablespoons per application when sunbathing in swimwear.

Applied properly, a 400ml bottle should not last one person much more than a week.

Many people use just a third of this, so experts recommend you top up your protection with a second application half an hour after the first.

Ideally, the cream should be reapplied every one to two hours.

Water-resistant sunscreens are not waterproof and their protection wears off the longer you spend in the sea or the pool. They should always be reapplied after swimming.

This is a matter of dispute. On Monday the charity RAFT published research which found that sunscreens only work if they are applied in a thick 'buttery' layer and do not provide any protection if they are rubbed in.

However, manufacturers such as Boots say it is not practical to leave the cream sitting on the skin. They say the creams are designed to be rubbed in and are effective when rubbed in.

Sunscreens provide protection from the moment you put them on. However, most manufacturers recommend you apply them around 20 minutes before going out in the sun to ensure they are properly absorbed.

No, it is a matter of personal preference. Creams, milks, oils and sprays should all provide the level of protection stated on the bottle.

Adult versions are suitable for children. However, the child versions are formulated not to irritate young skin and may provide even better protection against burning.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

