TITLE	Gas bubbles that kill tumours could help conquer liver cancer

By PAT HAGAN

Last updated at 09:53 08 August 2006

Exploding gas bubbles are the latest high-tech weapon in the war on deadly cancers.

Scientists have devised a way of using the bubbles to block blood supplies to tumours, effectively starving them to death.

The ingenious technique involves injecting tiny liquid droplets into the bloodstream and tracking them with ultrasound images until they reach the location of the tumour.

Once they are in place, the droplets are zapped with a high-intensity ultrasonic beam.

This triggers an explosion, in which a gas inside each droplet is released and makes them expand to 125 times their original size -blocking the blood vessel and shutting off the tumour's supply of oxygen and nutrients.

The droplet changes shape from round to cylindrical, so it blocks the whole of the blood supply.

"It deforms into a long, sausage-shaped bubble that lodges in the blood vessel like a cork," says Professor Joseph Bull, from the department of biomechanical engineering at the University of Michigan.

"Two or three doses of bubbles will block most of the blood flow, and without blood, the tumour dies."

The therapy, called embolisation, is a major breakthrough for solid tumours such as kidney and liver cancers, which can be difficult to treat.

No side effects

Starving tumours of blood is seen as a promising way to tackle certain cancers. There are drugs that take a similar approach to shrinking malignant growths. But the big advantage of this new technique is it has no side effects, and allows doctors to pinpoint exactly where bubbles are formed, reducing the risk of disrupting blood flow to healthy tissue.

British surgeons already use other forms of emboli-sation to tackle kidney cancer, mainly in patients who are not healthy enough to undergo conventional surgery for tumour removal.

The patient is given a local anaesthetic. A catheter is inserted into the main blood vessel in the groin and fed through the body until its tip is next to the cancer.

Small pieces of gelatine sponge, or plastic beads, are injected through the tube into blood vessels, to staunch blood flow to the tumour. The patient stays in hospital at least one night to recover.

But the precision needed to put sponges or beads in exactly the right place means only highly-skilled surgeons can perform the procedure.

University of Michigan experts believe using gas bubbles is easier and more accurate. They inject tiny droplets that contain a compound called perfluorocarbon. At room temperature, this is a liquid. But when exposed to heat, it turns into an expanding gas.

Hundreds of droplets are squirted into the bloodstream and monitored as they spread around the body. They are so small they flow easily, without causing any blockages.

Although some bypass the tumour completely, others branch off down the blood vessels supplying it with nutrients.

As they do, doctors blast them with high-intensity focused ultrasound - a beam of sound waves that heats up the droplets. They swell and lodge in position, shutting off blood flow.

Although the technique is still being developed, the bubbles themselves are already widely used. Perfluorocarbons can help ventilate injured lungs by carrying oxygen deep into the airways.

Ed Yong, information officer at Cancer Research UK, said: "Using bubbles would be much less invasive. But often, even after cutting off the blood supply, the cancer remains and could still spread."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

