TITLE	&#163;60 vaccine to prevent cervical cancer unveiled

By JENNY HOPE and EMILY COOK

Last updated at 22:55 10 September 2006

Women will be able to pay &pound;180 for a vaccine to protect themselves and their daughters against cervical cancer within weeks.

The vaccine has been hailed as a huge breakthrough and offers 100 per cent protection against the two main strains of the virus which triggers the vast majority of cases of the disease.

It will be licensed later this month and could be available to women up and down the country within weeks.

GPs and private clinics are now bracing themselves for a rush of women signing up to receive the vaccine, paying around &pound;60 a time for three injections over a six-month period.

The licence will be granted for girls as young as nine, who it is believed would then be able to get the vaccine with parental consent.

Initially, women will be able to pay privately for the vaccine but it is not yet known whether any primary care trusts will also offer it at their discretion on the NHS.

It is hoped however, that the jabs will eventually be given free to all women.

The course of injections is designed to prevent infection by up to four strains of the human papilloma virus (HPV), which is sexually transmitted.

Gardasil will be the first vaccine to get a licence, covering girls aged nine to 26 years, followed by Cervarix early next year, which protects up to the age of 55 years.

It will be a prescription only medicine, which would be administered by a doctor or nurse.

The development of the vaccine has been shrouded in controversy because some fear vaccinating girls as young as nine would encourage sexual promiscuity, while boys may also get the jabs to stop the spread of infection.

However, doctors in the US, where Gardasil is licensed and being strongly marketed through TV ads and consumer publications, report thousands of patients and parents asking for protection.

In the UK, cancer experts want a mass vaccination programme of adolescent girls at the age of 12 before they become sexually active and exposed to HPV.

But a recommendation from the Department of Health's vaccine advisers is not expected for some months, and it may not include a 'catch-up' policy of jabs for older teenagers and women.

Gardasil has been proven to be 100 per cent effective against the two main strains of the HPV virus.

If a woman has already caught one of the strains it would not work against it, but the vaccine offers protection from further infection with the other types.

A small number of women with a strain of the virus in its early stages may also see their symptoms prevented from developing further.

Those who are aware of the dangers of the virus are asking about getting vaccinated, said Pamela Morton, director of Jo's Trust, a charity which fights cervical cancer.

She said: "We are expecting a huge demand and women have been contacting us about it.

"In one tragic case, a 60-year-old woman lost her daughter a year ago at the age of 37 from cervical cancer, leaving two teenage boys behind.

"She is determined no other grandmother, husband or child should go through what's happened to her - and says she would frogmarch her teenage daughter down to get the vaccine."

Mrs Morton believes 'worried well' women will pay for the vaccine but fears the less affluent will fall through the net unless the NHS agrees to fund the jabs.

She said: "It will be cost-effective in the long run because, together with screening, it will stop many women from developing cervical cancer. We can't afford to let postcode prescribing prevent its use."

Around 3,000 cases of cervical cancer are diagnosed in the UK each year, and it kills 1,000 women.

It is hoped the vaccine could dramatically reduce the need for smear tests which lead to anxiety for thousands of women each year who have an abnormal result.

Some researchers say a mass vaccination of young girls would halve the number of abnormal smears carried out each year.

It would also cut by 50 per cent the number of diagnostic tests needed to check for pre-cancerous signs.

And it might even reduce the likelihood of other cancers caused by the same sexually transmitted virus.

Currently some four million women undergo a smear test every year to spot early warning signs of cancer.

All women between the ages of 25 and 64 are eligible for a free smear test every three to five years, with the time interval dependent on their age.

Dr Anne Szarewski, clinical consultant for Cancer Research UK, who is carrying out a trial looking into protection offered to older women from vaccination, said: "Older women want to get the vaccine, especially those who have had abnormal smears, and many will be prepared to pay even if they only get reduced protection.

"We may end up with a situation where cervical cancer vaccines are like flu vaccines which are recommended for certain at risk patients while others have to get them privately."

She said women can already pay for a test to see if they are infected with HPV, but it doesn't distinguish the strains involved.

"They might as well just have the vaccine which could offer 70 to 75 per cent protection from specific strains, in case they have not yet been exposed," she added.

Gardasil is due to receive its licence by October 2, but it may be granted one even earlier.

In Britain, it is expected that administrative work will take another two months before the vaccine is formally marketed.

Dr Nicholas Kitchin, medical director at Sanofi Pasteur MSD, which markets Gardasil, said: "GPs will be able to prescribe it to patients and I hope it will be available on the NHS, or what will it do to inequality of access? There will be a private market to some degree, but women wanting it will probably approach their GP first".

A spokesman for GlaxoSmithKline which makes Cervarix said: "Any considerations around the introduction of an HPV vaccination programme would be for the Department of Health.

"We are in ongoing dialogue with the Department on the progress of our vaccine and will continue to keep them updated."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

