TITLE	Beat testicular cancer

by PETA BEE, Daily Mail

Champion cyclist Lance Armstrong's victory in the Tour de France in 1999 was admirable in any circumstances. After all, the torturous 2,300 miles covered in the event make it one of the most gruelling sports competitions of all.

But Armstrong's win was all the more remarkable considering that in 1996 the American cyclist was given a 40 pc chance of living after being diagnosed with testicular cancer that had spread to his lung and brain.

Armstrong underwent surgery to remove the malignant testicle, had chemotherapy to destroy secondary tumours and a six-hour operation to remove two brain tumours. For several weeks he had chemotherapy administered by tubes threaded through his rib cage and directly into his lungs.

Yet throughout the arduous recovery programme, which often required him to have five hours of treatment a day, his resolve to fight the disease and return to good health was unfaltering.

When diagnosed with cancer, Armstrong was advised to overhaul his diet and increase its content of fresh fruit and vegetables and decrease his intake of fatty foods. Pink grapefruit, a favourite, was something he consumed for breakfast and as a snack during the day. 'Citrus fruits,' he said at the time, 'now they definitely fight cancer.'

His theory was based on the fact that citrus fruits are rich in vitamin C, a known scavenger and powerful antioxidant, and that the pith contains bioflavonoids, which also have cancer-fighting properties.

According to the Lance Armstrong Foundation, he also believed that the agents in fruit and vegetables helped to boost his immune system so that it could react immediately to destroy mutant cells.

What the experts say: In a 1997 report published jointly by the American Institute For Cancer Research and the World Cancer Research Fund, it was agreed that a diet rich in vegetables and fruits does have a protective effect and may decrease the risk of many forms of cancer.

Six weeks after being diagnosed with cancer, Armstrong competed in a 26-mile cycling race, just to prove to himself and others that he could. Drawing on every ounce of physical strength, he then proceeded to stick to a demanding fitness regime which he believed would help him beat the disease.

Despite feeling drained from intense chemotherapy, whenever possible he continued to cycle up to 50 miles a day in a bid to preserve some physical strength for his fight.

What the experts say: 'One of the most difficult aspects of cancer is the sense that you have lost control of your body. Anything that gives you back a sense of control is good, and that is why some people find exercise can help,' says Clare Moynihan of the Institute Of Cancer Research at London's Royal Marsden Hospital.

'Different people have different ways of coping and this was Armstrong's. If all you can manage is a gentle walk but find it helps, then that is fine. But if you can manage no exercise at all, then you are not a failure, just fighting your battle in a different way.'

Perhaps more than anything else, it is the immense psychological strength Armstrong showed, he believes, that helped him overcome cancer. 'To find out I had cancer - that was very tough,' he said. 'So many things go through your mind. But then you settle down and realise you have to fight it.'

Life, he said, became his number one priority; creating awareness of testicular cancer through the Lance Armstrong Foundation his number two; and professional cycling pushed back to number three.

Speaking after his victory in the Tour de France, Armstrong explained how he has gained mentally from his life-threatening illness and that the experience has re-shaped his character. 'Perhaps I am more focused as a rider, but for sure I am a better person,' he says.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

