TITLE	How to avoid skin cancer

By ANDREA PERRY, Daily Mail online

Skin cancer is the most common cancer in the UK and the numbers of new cases diagnosed each year are increasing.

Officially, there are more than 40,000 new cases of skin cancer in Britain each year. But because many cases are not being reported, doctors believe the true figure is around 100,000. The good news is that nearly all these cancers can be treated

Types of skin cancer

There are two main types of skin cancer: melanoma and non-melanoma. The latter is far the most common and can usually be treated successfully.

Melanoma: This is the 12th most common cancer in men and 11th in women in the UK. It usually develops in cells in the outer layer of the skin and starts in the areas of normal looking skin.

It also starts in moles, however in rare cases it can occur in other parts of the body such as the eye, under the fingernails or internally.

The risk of melanomas increases with age and tends to affect people over the age of 50. People who have a large number of moles (more than 100) have an increased risk of developing melanoma.

Non-Melanoma: This also develops in cells in the outer layer of the skin. There are two types of non-melanoma: basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma.

Basal cell carcinoma is the most common form of non-melanoma skin cancer and usually appears on the parts of the body most exposed to the sun such as the face, scalp, ears, hands shoulders and back.

Squamous cell carcinoma accounts for around 20 per cent of non-melanoma skin cancers and these most commonly appear on the sun-exposed face, neck, lips, ears, hands, shoulders and limbs.

Non-melanoma skin cancer does not usually run in families but the risk of developing melanoma is increased if the person's family has a history of melanoma.

What causes skin cancer?

Sun exposure causes skin cancer because of the ultraviolet (UV) radiation in sunshine. There are three main types of UV radiation, UVA, UVB, and UVC.

UVA and UVB can cause skin damage including sunburn and premature ageing of the skin. This damage can lead to skin cancer. Cumulative sun exposure is the most important risk factor for non-melanoma skin cancer.

Some evidence suggests that sunburn or intense exposure to sun in childhood particularly increase the risk of developing melanoma.

Are some people more at risk than others?

You may be more at risk depending on your skin colour. Melanin is a protective pigment that is produced within the skin and helps protect the deeper layers of the skin from the harmful effects of sun.

Fair skin contains less melanin than dark skin and so fair skinned people have an increased risk of developing skin cancer.

The tell tale signs

Around one third of all melanomas develop from normal moles so it is important to be aware of any sudden changes in moles.

How to spot a melanoma

The mole will have an irregular shape, ragged and irregular edge, be a mixture of colours including brown, black and blue, larger than 5mm across and will enlarge over a six-week period.

The symptoms of a non-melanoma skin cancer are: a new growth or sore that does not heal within four weeks, a spot or sore that continues to itch or scab and persistent skin ulcers that are not explained by other causes.

Top tips for sun safety

&bull; Avoid the midday sun between 11am and 3pm.

&bull; Don't be fooled by a cool breeze or light cloud: you can still get burnt.

&bull; Cover up in the sun with loose cotton clothes, a wide brimmed hat and sunglasses with UV protection.

&bull; Wear a sunscreen of at least sun protection factor (SPF) 14 and a four star UVA rating on the areas which cannot be covered.

&bull; Protect yourself while swimming.

&bull; Look out for the solar UV index on the TV weather forecasts.

&bull; Children need extra protection.

&bull; Avoids using artificial tanning equipment to get a tan.

For more information visit www.cancerresearchuk.org/sunsmart

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

