TITLE	Are you desperate to get a tan?

by ANDREA PERRY, femail.co.uk

It's raining outside and the sun lovers amongst us can't wait for the return of the warmer weather so we can strip off and get a healthy tan. But how much are you prepared to pay for that bronzed look?

Skin cancer is the most common cancer in the UK. Around 100,000 people are diagnosed with the illness each year. Of these, more than 5,000 are likely to die from the condition.

But the Imperial Cancer Research Fund's new Sun Awareness Campaign, launched yesterday, demonstrates in graphic detail that even a skin cancer scare isn't enough to put some people off.

It's 'Sun Sense or Sun Abuse?' survey revealed that 14 per cent of the British public would still want a tan - even after experiencing the worry of a potential skin cancer.

Whilst more than seven out of 10 people say that those with a suntan take risks with their health - 71 per cent still think that people with suntans look healthy.

The survey also found that one in five of us indulge in binge sunbathing over a sunny weekend.

Those quizzed said celebrities like Brad Pitt and Robbie Williams look better with a tan although in the case of female stars there was a marked difference of opinion. More than half said that Kate Winslet looked better untanned.

Dr Charlotte Proby, Consultant Dermatologist at the ICRF Tumour Unit, at St Bartholomew's and The Royal London Hospital School of Medicine, said: 'I am concerned at how desperate some people are for a tan.

'A suntan shows that the skin is being damaged by too much sunlight and is trying to protect itself. Sun-seeking behaviour and inadequate sun protection increases the risk of the skin being sunburned and this damage will increase the risk of developing skin cancer.'

She stressed that skin cancer is preventable and that it is particularly important for parents to understand that skin damage starts in childhood and to protect youngsters at an early age by ensuring that they are covered up.

Dr Proby added: 'The fashion message should be that pale is beautiful.'

Now, for the first time, a holiday company has agreed to join forces with a cancer charity to tackle the skin cancer problem.

JMC will be taking the Imperial Cancer Research Fund's Sun Sense 2001 message across the globe with reps in resorts from Mexico to Mallorca delivering the top tips on keeping safe.

 More than two million holidaymakers will travel with JMC this summer but 24 per cent (500,000) will only use low factor sunscreen and 14 per cent no protection at all.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

