TITLE	Eating sprouts can help prevent breast cancer, claims study

By EMILY COOK

Last updated at 16:05 17 October 2006

Brussels sprouts and cabbage could be the latest weapons in the battle against breast cancer, according to new research.

Scientists have discovered a chemical in the green vegetables that appears to kill off breast cancer cells when combined with chemotherapy drugs.

Previous studies have already suggested a link between eating such vegetables and prevention against cancer.

But this is one of the first studies examining how the vegetables can play a role in treating the disease.

For the latest research, British scientists studied the effects of the naturally-occuring compound indole-3-carbinol (I3C) on tumour cells in the laboratory.

I3C is found in cruciferous vegetables (belonging to the mustard family), including broccoli, cauliflower, kale and watercress, with high concentrations in Brussels sprouts and cabbage.

For the research, carried out at the University of Leicester, cancer cells were fed doses of around 300mg to 400mg a day - roughly the same amount found in a trolley-full of cabbages.

The study showed that when the compound was used in conjunction with common chemotherapy drugs, the tumour cells were killed off.

Professor Margaret Manson, of the Department of Biochemistry and the Department of Cancer Studies and Molecular Medicine, said the trials were in the early stages but hoped the findings will eventually benefit cancer patients.

Speaking at the National Cancer Research Institute Conference in Birmingham, she said: "Obviously, in humans you would want to reverse the cancer, but if you could even halt it so it does not progress further, that would be beneficial.

"Usually what kills patients is metastatic cancer, where it spreads around the body.

"Although we need to carry out further studies on tumours removed from patients, the potential benefits are clear."

The study, funded by the Medical Research Council, involved using I3C on four different types of breast cancer cells. The findings were published in the journal Carcinogenesis.

Professor Manson said that the compound appeared to alter the molecules in three of the cell types, making them more vulnerable to anticancer drugs.

Combining the compound with chemotherapy drugs therefore enhanced the drugs' effectiveness.

It is thought that I3C may have a similar impact on colon cancer cells.

Prof Manson added: "We will repeat the studies on cells derived directly from patient tumours which have been surgically removed and, if the results are confirmed, this will eventually lead to clinical trials." Dr Sheila Bingham, director of the Medical Research Council Centre for Nutrition and Cancer at the University of Cambridge, said: "This study supports the growing evidence that food can be important in altering our susceptibility to cancer and possibly survival from it, and may help to explain why fruits and vegetables are so important."

Josephine Querido, science information officer at Cancer Research UK, said: "This study adds to the evidence that I3C molecule - found in broccoli, cabbage and other cruciferous vegetables - can help block the growth of breast cancer cells.

"The work was carried out on cells grown in the laboratory and it is not yet clear if I3C will have a role in breast cancer treatment. "After stopping smoking, a healthy balanced diet including plenty of fruit and vegetables is the best way to reduce your risk of developing certain cancers."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

