TITLE	Oestrogen link to breast cancer

Breast cancer is hormonally driven, by oestrogen. Normally, oestrogen is extremely helpful - aside from its role in the reproductive cycle, it keeps blood vessels elastic, increases good cholesterol and strengthens bones by absorbing calcium from the blood.

But too much oestrogen can wreak havoc among cells by speeding up their growth and multiplication - and sometimes causing breast cancer.

There are many different types of oestrogen. The body's natural oestrogen is 'strong' oestrogen and can be counterbalanced by 'weak' oestrogens from plant foods. 'Good' and 'bad' oestrogens are formed when the body prepares to remove oestrogen from the system.

Strong and weak oestrogens actively circulate in the bloodstream. Good and bad oestrogens are waste products. Chemical oestrogens are chemicals like pesticides that mimic real oestrogens in the body.

Finally, there are 'anti-oestrogens' - drugs like tamoxifen that completely block oestrogen's effect in breast tissue.

All oestrogens lock on to cell receptors, fitting them like keys in a lock. The breasts are loaded with oestrogen receptors, which soak up oestrogen from the blood. When too many strong, bad or chemical oestrogens reach these receptors, the potential for cancer rises.

Hundreds of studies have now definitively linked excess oestrogen levels with higher risks of breast cancer.

Where Does Oestrogen Go Wrong? When strong oestrogens lock on to receptors, they emit very powerful signals for cell growth. When weak oestrogens lock on, the signal is much weaker. The more powerful the signal, the greater the potential for cancer.

If weak oestrogens fill receptors, they prevent strong oestrogens from attaching, thereby reducing the stimulus to multiply, and reducing the chance that cells will multiply out of control.

Certain chemicals and pesticides are similar in composition to natural oestrogen. When they lock onto receptors they also stimulate cell growth and division, increasing the cancer potential. And fatty breast tissue can concentrate even traces of pesticides to highly toxic levels - up to 700 times greater than found in blood.

How Food Helps Diet plays a vital and powerful role in reducing cancer risk. Weak food oestrogens prevent too many strong oestrogens attaching to receptors.

Avoiding pesticide-exposed food limits our exposure to chemical oestrogens.

Certain foods can help the body break oestrogen down into more 'good' than 'bad' oestrogen, and high-fibre foods bind to oestrogen in the bowel, preventing its absorption back into the bloodstream.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

