TITLE	Can vitamin D help ward off breast cancer?

Last updated at 16:14 17 October 2006

Women with high levels of vitamin D have better resistance to breast cancer, say British researchers.

A new study shows women with advanced breast cancer had lower levels of vitamin D than those in the early stages of the disease.

Researchers at Imperial College London claim it is more evidence the vitamin - which comes from sunlight - may protect against cancer, and are planning to investigate whether supplements can help fight the disease.

Future treatments for breast cancer patients might involve keeping vitamin D levels high.

The study published in the Journal of Clinical Pathology found women with early stage disease had significantly higher levels of vitamin D than women in the advanced stages of the disease.

Dr Carlo Palmieri, from Imperial College London and lead author on the paper, said this was the first study comparing vitamin D levels in breast cancer patients.

He said: "It adds to the weight of evidence that vitamin D is important for the development and the progression of breast cancer."

"There's evidence from experimental work that vitamin D can tend to be useful in treating breast cancer."

"We know from studies that adding vitamin D to cancer cells makes them change their behaviour and become slightly more normal. Their growth slows down."

"The next step would be to treat women newly diagnosed with breast cancer with vitamin D to see if it improves their outcome."

Experts believe vitamin D deficiency may cause thousands of cancer deaths every year.

The body makes most of its vitamin D from sunlight, but sun exposure is controversial because it can also trigger skin cancer, especially in fair-skinned people.

The latest study involved 204 women with early-stage breast cancer and 75 with advanced breast cancer.

Researchers measured levels of vitamin D, parathyroid hormone (which regulates calcium levels), and calcium in both groups.

The results showed women with early stage disease had significantly higher levels of vitamin D than women in the advanced stages of the disease.

Previous studies have suggested women living in sunnier climates have a lower risk of breast cancer, and those exposed to high levels of sunlight as teenagers are less at risk.

An analysis of more than a million cancer patients in the UK found those diagnosed in summer and autumn live longer than those whose cancer is found at other times of the year, probably because their vitamin D levels are topped up by sun exposure.

Dr Palmieri said more work needed to be done on why vitamin D levels were lower in women with advanced breast cancer, and whether healthy women could prevent breast cancer by taking more vitamin D.

He said: "This report, while being an observational study, clearly shows that circulating vitamin D levels are lower in advanced breast cancer as compared to early breast cancer."

"It lends support to the idea that vitamin D has a role in the progression of breast cancer."

"The next step in this research is to try and understand the potential causes and mechanisms underlying these differences and the precise consequences at a molecular level."

"We also need to look at the potential clinical implications of monitoring and maintaining high circulating vitamin D levels in breast cancer patients."

"By answering these questions we may be able to improve the treatment of women with breast cancer."

Vitamin D is found in salmon, tuna and other oily fish, and is routinely added to milk, but diet accounts for very little of the nutrient that actually makes it into the bloodstream.

Exposure to sunlight produces far higher levels of vitamin D.

In the UK, the Food Standards Agency recommends 10mcg supplements for those who are elderly, pregnant, Asian, get little sun exposure and eat no meat or oily fish.

It says daily supplements of 25mcg are unlikely to cause harm.

Among the vitamin's vital functions are regulating the amount of calcium and phosphate in the body, which keeps bones and teeth healthy.

The danger with taking excessive doses for long periods is that the body absorbs too much calcium, which could weaken bones and possibly damage liver and kidneys.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

