TITLE	'Infertile couples' children more likely to be autistic, say experts

By JENNY HOPE

Last updated at 18:00 25 October 2006

Infertile couples are three times more likely to have a child affected by severe disorders, including autism and cancer, than healthy couples, say US researchers.

A new study says the extra risk is mostly caused by health problems that make it difficult for these couples to start a family in the first place.

As a result, the babies of women who succeed in getting pregnant may suffer from poor growth in the womb that can trigger lifelong developmental and other disorders.

The study also claims treatments used to help childless couples may contribute, possibly affecting the growth of the embryo in the laboratory.

Fertility specialists are calling for childless couples to be counselled about the risks and get their health improved before undergoing fertility treatment.

The study of 4,000 women and their children aged up to six years is one of the few ever to examine the health of children beyond infancy.

Professor Mary Croughan, who led the research at the University of California, San Francisco, said conditions classified as 'severe' included cerebral plasy, mental retardation, autism, seizures or cancer.

Taken together, they were three times more common among children born to infertile couples - with autism up to four times more likely.

Moderate health problems such as attention deficit disorders, developmental delay, hearing and vision disabilities were 40 per cent more likely in children born to infertile couples compared with those conceived by health couples.

Prof Croughan stressed these conditions were "still very rare" in these children. She said: "The majority of children conceived to infertile couples were healthy and did not have significant health issues."

The study findings were released at the American Society for Reproductive Medicine annual meeting in New Orleans.

Altogether 2,000 women with a history of infertility or who conceived using a range of fertility treatments between 1994-98 - of all ages - were compared with 2,000 healthy mothers living in California.

Infertile women were more likely to have existing health problems like heart disease, diabetes and high blood pressure, and were more at risk of pregnancy and labour complications.

Children born to couples with a history of infertility were 20 per cent more likely to be of low birthweight, premature and stay in hospital for more than three days.

They were at double the risk of not growing well in the womb.

When the investigators compared the health of the children up to the age of six, they found higher rates of some disorders.

Autism was increased fourfold among children born to infertile couples, which meant 26 babies were affected compared with about seven born to healthy couples.

There were twice as many babies with cerebral palsy born to infertile couples - about 10 babies compared with four babies of healthy couples.

There were no significant differences in the children's health problems based on different fertility treatments used, with one-third of mothers conceiving naturally despite having diagnosed fertility problems, said Dr Croughan.

But it was possible that fertility treatments had an independent effect that 'might add' to the health problems, she said.

For example, the culture medium used to grow the embryos before implantation might adversely affect them, along with variable growing conditions in the laboratory, including temperature and oxygen levels.

However, the factors that initially contributed to the infertility were of most importance, she said.

Increasing age of the father also contributes to brain disorders, she said.

Some health problems of the children were genetically based, and that might trigger the brain and eye cancers and childhood leukaemia found in the study, she added.

Other experts pointed out that the study looked at comparatively wealthy people living and working in California, in particular in areas that have been noted for high levels of autism.

Clare Brown, chief executive of Infertility Network UK, said: "To our knowledge in the UK the incidence of fetal anomalies and adverse foetal events is related more to multiple births linked to the number of embryos transferred rather than the process of IVF itself."

Stuart Lavery, spokesman for the British Fertility Society, said it was possible the data was skewed because of the vast range of fertility problems and treatments included in the study.

He said: "Are they comparing like with like? There is no doubt that people who have difficulties with their fertility have difficulties conceiving and carrying pregnancies, although it has not been shown that it is the infertility that is causing the problems."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

