TITLE	Breast implants in cancer scare

Women with breast implants are up to three times more likely to die from lung or brain cancer than those without, it was reported today.

The findings come after a long-running US study of 13,500 women who received breast implants, comparing their risk of dying from cancer with the general population and other people who had undergone plastic surgery.

And the study found that women with saline implants suffered the same higher rates of lung and brain cancer as those with controversial silicone implants.

The study, reported today in the New York Times newspaper and due to be published in two medical journals later this month, started in 1989. It followed 13,500 women who received implants before then and followed their progress until this year, comparing them with 4,000 other plastic surgery patients and the general population.

It found they were twice as likely to die of brain cancer and three times as likely to be killed by respiratory diseases, with lung cancer the biggest of those killers.

And a separate analysis of the rate of cancer, rather than deaths from the disease, found women with implants were more susceptible to the disease.

'I see this as a warning,' said Dr Diana Zuckerman, one of the study's scientific advisers. 'I think this is very alarming.' Dr Zuckerman said the study could not be used to show that breast implants cause lung and brain cancer, but could show there was a statistical link.

'You can't draw a conclusion from these studies, even though they are very well designed, very solid,' she said.

The chief researcher, Dr Louise Brinton, of the American National Cancer Institute, said more research was now needed to find why the lung and brain cancer death rates were higher.

'What the study showed is no difference for most of the cancer sites, which I think is good news,' said Dr Brinton. 'And for the few sites which we did find differences, we have no ready explanation. 'So I would not want to alarm women on the basis of one study.'

Dr Brinton said research in the future would concentrate on whether women with breast implants were more likely to be smokers. It was not known if the women who died of the cancers in the study had been smokers, as information was taken from death certificates.

'We couldn't fully account for smoking differences,' said Dr Brinton. Of the women involved in the research, one in 10 had saline implants, with the other 90% having silicone implants, which were banned in the US in 1992.

But the researchers found identical rates of death from cancer in the two groups, despite concerns over the safety of silicone.

The research comes after a Commons select committee recommended that women undergoing breast implant surgery should have access to independent advice and counselling and that there should be a new surveillance system to monitor the possible side-effects of breast implants.

 About 8,000 women a year in Britain have breast enlargement surgery but some have had implants removed because of health scares.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

