TITLE	Two fizzy drinks a day increase risk of pancreatic cancer by 90 per cent

Last updated at 11:00 09 November 2006

Consuming two cans of fizzy drinks a day can double your risk of developing one of the most fatal types of cancer, say researchers.

People who add sugar to cups of tea or coffee are also at higher risk of pancreatic cancer, according to a new study.

Swedish researchers blame a heavy intake of sweetened foods and drinks for increasing the chances of developing one of the most lethal cancers.

Almost all the 7,000 people who get pancreatic cancer annually in the UK die shortly after diagnosis, partly because the symptoms are spotted too late.

Tumours are also hard to detect because the pancreas is buried deep in the body.

Only two per cent of patients are alive five years after first being treated, although surgery followed by chemotherapy can increase survival rates.

In the new study, published in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition drinking two or more fizzy drinks each day was linked to a 90 per cent extra risk of pancreatic cancer compared with people who never drank them.

Dr Susanna Larsson, of the department of environmental medicine at the Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, said more information about the causes was vital to beat the disease.

She said 'It is perhaps the most serious form of cancer, with very poor prognoses for its victims. 'Since it's difficult to treat and is often discovered too late, it's particularly important that we learn to prevent it.'

Researchers ran a dietary survey in 1997 when they questioned almost 80,000 men and women aged 45 to 83 years about the foods and drinks they consumed.

The group was monitored until June 2005, when it was found that 131 people had died of cancer of the pancreas.

The researchers found the risk of developing the disease was related to the amount of sugar in the diet.

Most at risk were those who drank high quantities of fizzy or syrup based drinks twice or more a day, who had a 90 per cent raised risk of developing the cancer.

People who added sugar to food and drinks at least five times a day ran a 70 per cent extra risk compared with those who did not.

People who ate creamed fruit - a product in Sweden resembling runny jam - at least once a day also ran a 50 per cent higher risk than those not eating this kind of dessert.

Dr Larsson said higher sugar intake was probably responsible.

She said 'We think it's to do with insulin. If you eat and drink more sugary food it increases your blood sugar levels which affects the amount of work the pancreas has to do.

"It could stimulate growth of the pancreas and this could lead to cancer.'

She said smoking was one of the biggest triggers for pancreatic cancer.

In the UK there has been a five per cent drop in pancreatic cancer cases which is thought to be linked to a drop in smoking.

But Dr Larsson said it was possible that a drop in smoking had masked a rise in consumption of fizzy drinks and sugary foods generally in recent years.

'The rise in the amount of soft drinks consumed could offset some of the fall in cases we would expect because fewer people are smoking' she added.

'The best advice we can offer is for people, expecially children, to restrict their consumption of sugary foods and drinks' she said.

Doctors already warn women in particular to restrict the amount of some fizzy drinks they consume because it makes their bones weaker, probably due to phosphoric acid which is found in cola.

The study did not distinguish between different types of fizzy drinks - looking at only those with added sugar, or syrup-based or squash drinks with added sugar.

Henry Scowcroft, science information officer at Cancer Research UK, said 'The latest figures show that pancreatic cancer rates fell by five per cent between 1997 and 2003.

'But this is probably because more people are giving up smoking which is the major established cause of the disease. 'We know that a person's diet has a significant effect on their risk of several types of cancer including pancreatic cancer.

'This report highlights the need for further research to understand the specific effect of sugar intake on pancreatic cancer risk.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

