TITLE	Eating red meat daily increases risk of breast cancer, say experts

By JENNY HOPE

Last updated at 11:53 13 December 2006

Younger women who regularly eat red meat could be massively increasing their chances of developing breast cancer, say researchers.

A new study shows eating more than four and a half ounces of red meat a day can almost double the risk in some women compared with those who eat it infrequently.

The risk - which involves women who have not gone through the menopause - is linked to the most prevalent form of breast cancer.

US researchers claim the higher risk may be triggered by cancer-causing compounds in cooked or processed red meat, or its iron content.

But cattle in the US are also treated with hormones to promote growth which could enhance the breast cancer risk.

Dr Eunyoungt Cho, who led researchers at Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, said 'Several biological mechanisms may explain the posituve association.

"Given that most of the risk factors for breast cancer are not easily modifiable, these findings ahave potential public health implications in preventing breast cancer."

Previous research has found that high consumption of red meat can significantly raise the risk of stomach and pancreatic cancers.

The study, published in the Archives of Internal Medicine, looked at 90,000 premenopausal women who were followed for 12 years.

They filled out food questionnaires on three occasions.

By the end of the study 1,021 women had developed breast cancer.

Women who ate more than one and a half servings of red meat a day - the equivalent of a burger and a sausage - had almost double the risk of oestrogen-positive breast cancer compared with those who ate three or fewer servings a week. A serving of meat was around three ounces.

The link persisted when researchers analysed the figures for the amount of red meat consumed in grams and when the women were split into five groups depending on how much they ate.

There are 44,000 breast cancer cases in the UK each year, with the vast majority diagnosed in women after the menopause. 12,500 women die from the disease.

Henry Scowcroft, science information officer at Cancer Research UK, said "According to this study, a woman would need to eat more than one-and-a half portions of meat a day, every day, to significantly increase her risk of hormone-sensitive breast cancer before the menopause.

"But the overall risk of pre-menopausal breast cancer is low when compared to getting the disease after the menopause.  So even at the highest rates of meat consumption this is overall still a relatively small increase."

Dr Sarah Rawlings, Head of Policy and Information at Breakthrough Breast Cancer, said "Very little is known about diet and breast cancer risk because we eat a variety of foods and separating out the effect of an individual food is difficult.

"Previous studies looking at red meat and breast cancer have been inconclusive.

"This study relied on women accurately recalling their diet over the past year and was carried out in the US where animals receive growth hormones not permitted in the EU.

"More work is needed in this area before conclusions can be drawn. "Breakthrough Breast Cancer encourages all women to eat a balanced diet, limit alcohol consumption, exercise regularly and keep a healthy weight in order to maintain general good health."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

