TITLE	The obesity timebomb

by BEEZY MARSH, Daily Mail

Doctors are warning of an alarming rise in childhood obesity, with the number of officially overweight six-year-olds doubling in the last ten years and the proportion of 15-year-olds trebling.

A couch potato lifestyle and overindulgence in junk food is creating a generation who will grow up prone to heart disease, diabetes and cancer, say the experts.

Almost one in five ten-year-old girls in Britain is overweight. The problem is also rising among young boys, with 13 per cent being unhealthily heavy by the same age.

Urgent action must be taken to encourage children to spend more time playing sport and less time slumped in front of the TV, a conference in Belgium heard yesterday.

Professor Philip James told the European Congress on Obesity in Antwerp: 'Unless we can act firmly and decisively, we will be condemning a huge number of children across the whole of Europe to becoming a "lost generation".'

The professor, who is chairman of the International Obesity Task Force, added: 'They will face many of the weight-related diseases at a much earlier stage and will have their lives shortened as a result. We owe it to our children to do all we can to protect their health.'

Professor Jaap Seidell, president of the European Association for the Study of Obesity, added: 'We must persuade governments to spend more on the adequate treatment of obesity and for health promotion to prevent obesity.' The food, television and computer industries should also be involved in the fight, given that lifestyle is a key element in the problem, he said.

The experts painted a dismal picture of increasingly obese future generations hooked on high-calorie diets, television and computers. Unless action is taken now, they said, adult obesity levels will snowball over the next 20 years.

A study released in March found the proportion of British adults who were classified as overweight had risen from 19 per cent to 23 per cent in just two years. More than 4.5million men and 5.5million women in Britain were now classed as dangerously overweight.

Obesity increases the chances of developing cancer and heart disease, which are Britain's biggest killers. Being overweight also increases the likelihood of developing diabetes, high blood pressure, respiratory disorders, infertility and sleep problems.

Obesity expert Professor Peter Kopleman has seen demand for places at his specialist hospital clinic for overweight youngsters soar in recent years.

He takes patients from across the South-East at the clinic in the Royal London Hospital, at Whitechapel, East London. 'We now have a waiting list of about six months because we are one of very few clinics in the country. We've become overwhelmed in the past few years,' he said.

The clinic sees 400 new patients a year, as well as those who are still attending for regular check-ups to see that the are achieving their weight goals.

Professor Kopleman added: 'It is clearly down to diets of burgers and crisps.

'There are social implications and medical complications which follow that - particularly the risk of diabetes.' Figures released separately yesterday confirmed the trend away from healthy activities.

They showed one in six girls had 'retired' from sport outside school lessons by the time they reached 14. In their early teens. girls halved the amount of exercise they took and regularly skipped games lessons, according to a survey commissioned by the BBC as part of its Get Your Kit On campaign to persuade youngsters back into sport.

Fifteen per cent of all the children questioned - including boys - said they had played truant from PE lessons. PROFESSOR Walter Burniat of the European Childhood Obesity Group is to recommend a number of measures to tackle childhood obesity in a forthcoming report.

They are:

Children should undertake at least one hour of physical activity at school every day.

Teachers should place a greater emphasis on children doing sport during their leisure time.

School meals should be assessed for fat and calorie content and the healthiest options promoted. The availability of sugary snacks and fizzy drinks in schools should be strictly controlled.

Children's body mass index (BMI) should be measured annually to identify potential weight problems. BMI is measured by dividing a person's weight in kilograms by their height in metres squared. People with a BMI of 30 or more are considered obese.

 Families should do more sports together and ensure children eat proper, healthy meals at home.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

