TITLE	Teenage sunbed users face higher risk of cancer

By FIONA McRAE

Last updated at 08:40 29 November 2006

Using sunbeds as a teenager dramatically increases the risk of skin cancer, experts have warned.

A review of data from around the world found those who tanned this way in their teens and twenties were 75 per cent more likely to develop the most deadly form of skin cancer than those who started later in life.

The research, the first to quantify the link between sunbeds and skin cancer, described the evidence as 'unequivocal' and called for young people to be banned from using tanning salons.

It is thought that young skin is especially vulnerable to damage from UV rays.

The warning, from the World Health Organisation, comes amid growing concern that children as young as 11 are using sunbeds in a quest to look like their favourite tanned celebrities.

Rates of skin cancer have more than doubled in the last decade, with 70,000 Britons diagnosed each year. Sunbeds are blamed for 100 of the 2,000 lives lost annually to skin cancer in Britain.

The latest research, from the WHO's International Agency for Research on Cancer, found those who first used sunbeds under 30 were 75 per cent more likely to develop malignant melanoma, the most deadly form of skin cancer.

The data, drawn from 70 studies worldwide, also suggested that tanning appliances depress the immune system - making the body more vulnerable to infection. They can also cause eye cancer. Those who start using sunbeds after the age of 30 also face an increased risk of skin cancer. However, the danger is much lower.

The researchers concluded: 'In view of the strength and seriousness of the findings, effective action to restrict access to artificial tanning facilities - solariums, tanning studios, tanning parlours - to minors and young adults should be strongly considered.'

While government guidelines strongly advise against allowing youngsters to use sunbeds, this is not banned by law.

In September, the Chartered Institute of Environmental Health likened the availability of sunbeds in council-owned leisure centres to a 'hospital providing cigarettes'.

Last night, British cancer charities said they had always advised against the use of sunbeds.

Sara Hiom, of Cancer Research UK, said: 'We've known for years that too much sun exposure can cause skin cancer but, until now, it hasn't been possible to prove the link between sunbeds and skin cancer.

'We hope this will make consumers - especially young people - realise the dangers.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

