TITLE	New study links nuclear sites to cancer

A Euro MP has called on the Government to release figures after a new study suggested people living near nuclear power stations stood a high risk of developing cancer.

Radiation expert and independent researcher for Green Audit Dr Chris Busby found that children in Chepstow, south Wales, were 11 times more likely to develop myeloid leukaemia than the national average.

Chepstow is just five miles from Oldbury nuclear power station on the banks of the River Severn, which has been found to contain high levels of radioactive particles.

South West MEP Michael Holmes, who commissioned Dr Busby's report, said: "It is imperative that Health Minister Alan Milburn releases data on all cancer incidence down to ward levels as a matter of grave public concern.

"How many more clusters will have to be discovered before this government recognises that its existing models do not address the environmental causes of cancer, particularly the regular, permitted radioactive discharges from nuclear power stations such as Oldbury?

"It's possible the authorities know this is a much bigger threat then they are letting the public know - that's why they don't let the figures out.

"If the data Dr Busby had access to is correct and his mapping is correct it casts grave doubt on the view that nuclear power is safe."

Myeloid leukaemia is a very rare form of cancer which is strongly associated with radiation.

The report shows that three cases of the rare cancer were discovered in children up to the age of four between 1974 and 1990 in Chepstow, compared to the national average of 0.27.

It also shows children in Chepstow run a higher risk of developing all cancers at 3.54 times the national average.

Campaigners believe the findings are comparable with the Sellafield leukaemia cluster which was highlighted in the 1990s.

The study uses data gathered by the Wales Cancer Registry.

Dr Busby pushed for the same data to be released from the South Western Cancer Registry to find out if the incidence of cancer is as high on the English side of the River Severn, but said he was refused on the grounds of patient confidentiality.

He said: "This discovery begs for the immediate release of data for the English side of the river to give the complete picture, especially as Bristol is only eight miles from Oldbury and could be blighted."

Green Audit says it is an independent research consultancy serving the environmental movement.

Anti-nuclear campaigner and co-ordinator of pressure group Stop Hinkley, Jim Duffy described the findings as a "public health scandal" as three million people live within 35 miles of the Oldbury plant.

He said the study proved there was an "overwhelming link" between radiation levels around nuclear power plants and incidence of cancer.

BNFL, which runs Oldbury, was reported to have dismissed Dr Busby's findings.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

