TITLE	As radioactive spy is buried, bar staff who served him are facing cancer risk

Last updated at 11:13 08 December 2006

Muslim funeral rituals could not be carried out on the body of murdered KGB defector Alexander Litvinenko yesterday for fear of radioactive contamination.

The former Russian spy, who converted to Islam ten days before his death, was buried in a specially sealed coffin after a service at a London mosque.

Mr Litvinenko is said to have converted to Islam because of a close connection to the Muslim Chechens he had helped in defiance of the Russian government.

He died on after being poisoned by a massive dose of the radioactive substance polonium 210.

Seven workers at the Millennium Hotel in London - where Mr Litvinenko met two Russian contacts shortly before falling ill - have also tested positive for the lethal substance and could face the long-term risk of developing cancer. All of the staff worked in the hotel's Pine Bar, where 43-year-old Mr Litvinenko, drank tea with Russians Andrei Lugovoi and Dmitry Kovtun.

Last night, sources in Russia claimed that Mr Kovtun has fallen into a coma. Scotland Yard detectives had spoken to the businessman in Moscow hours earlier. He complained of feeling unwell afterwards. Under Islamic guidelines, Mr Litvinenko's body should have been specially bathed. Prayers should have been read over his open coffin. But Ghayasuddin Siddiqui, of the Muslim Parliament, said the risk of contamination was too great to respect his last wishes at the funeral held at Regent's Park mosque in London.

Nor could mosque leaders give him a traditional Muslim burial wrapped in swaddling instead of a coffin.

Instead, a heavy-duty oak coffin with special seals was made on orders from the Health Protection Agency. 'His father was told the body could not come here because of the radioactivity,' Mr Siddiqui said.

'He converted to Islam for spiritual reasons. All his Chechen friends were Sufi Muslims and he considered this religion to be the most just. This was his final wish.

'Unfortunately it could not be honoured.'

About 150 mourners, including Mr Litvinenko's father Walter and 12-year-old son Anatole, gathered at the mosque to hear readings and prayers in his honour yesterday.

Afterwards 50 family members and close friends, including his wife Marina, attended a burial service in Highgate Cemetery in North London.

Karl Marx, the founder of communism, is also buried there.

The hotel workers found to be contaminated had levels of polonium thousands of times lower than Mr Litvinenko's dose, the HPA said.

The agency said there was no short-term risk to their health but could not rule out a higher chance of them developing cancer in later life. It is not known how they were contaminated.

Polonium 210 has to be ingested, inhaled or absorbed through a wound to have an effect.

About 250 people who visited the Pine Bar on November 1 - the day Mr Litvinenko is thought to have been poisoned - have contacted health officials.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

