TITLE	Now girls as young as 12 are to be vaccinated against cervical cancer

By TAHIRA YAQOOB

Last updated at 21:00 25 December 2006

All schoolgirls as young as 12 are to be vaccinated against a sexually transmitted disease under a controversial scheme to crack down on cases on cervical cancer.

Plans are underway to immunise girls at school against human papilloma virus or HPV - the sexually-transmitted disease which causes 70 per cent of cervical cancer cases - despite concerns about giving the jab to children.

Medics have claimed giving young girls the vaccination before they are sexually active would reduce the need for routine smear tests and could drastically cut the number of deaths.

Of the 2,800 cases diagnosed in Britain every year, about 1,000 women die.

But family welfare campaigners have warned giving the jab could encourage girls to have underage sex.

Hugh McKinney, of the National Family Campaign pressure group, said: "Many people will question whether 12 is too young to be undertaking a vaccination programme that is important for when girls become sexually active.

"It could be seen as helping to promote or encourage sexual activity in girls before they are physically or mentally mature."

Family rights campaigner Victoria Gillick added: "I think it is a complete waste of time. It will not protect girls in the way they need protecting.

"Trying to treat the disease rather than the behaviour that causes it is immoral. Promiscuity causes girls all kinds of problems - not just the risk of getting cervical cancer."

Health experts have claimed three injections given over six months can prevent infection from up to four strains of HPV, which also causes genital warts.

The jab is said to be most effective if given before girls start having sex.

Sexually-transmitted HPV can be carried without causing symptoms, which means boys could pass it on without being aware they have it.

The effect of the immunisation, which would cost the NHS &pound;241.50 per girl, would last for 10 years but, as with other vaccines, parents could refuse consent.

One such vaccine, Gardasil, was licensed in the UK this year and is available on prescription to girls aged between nine and 26 or privately for about &pound;450.

Hollie Anderson, 13, from Enfield, north London, became the first person in the country to receive the treatment in October after her grandmother Shirley Hart battled with the disease.

But proposals put forward by the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, which are being considered by the Government, would mean every secondary school girl in the country receiving the jab.

Cancer experts warned immunising only girls was "short-sighted" while if just 25 per cent of parents refused consent on religious or moral grounds, the programme would be less effective.

Anne Szarewski, a clinical consultant at Cancer Research UK, said: "Vaccinating only girls is a short-sighted and potentially damaging strategy.

"It makes obvious sense that both boys and girls should be vaccinated, particularly if the uptake of the vaccine among girls falls below 75 per cent.

"But most countries are likely to start by vaccinating girls because it is cheaper." She added the girls-only proposals would reinforce the idea that sexual health was a female concern.

A spokeswoman from the Government's health department said: "We are seeking expert advice from the committee on the efficacy, safety and benefits that new vaccines against HPV might offer.

"No decisions will be taken until the committee presents its recommendations to ministers for consideration."

The Lancet medical journal called for mandatory immunisation throughout Europe earlier this year. The US state of Michigan became the first place in the world to require female pupils to have the jab in schools, with others set to follow suit.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

