TITLE	Could a dose of housework cut the risk of breast cancer

By FIONA MACRAE

Last updated at 21:24 28 December 2006

A daily session of housework can reduce the risk of breast cancer, experts have suggested.

Hoovering, dusting and other domestic chores provide the gentle exercise needed to keep generally fit and maintain a healthy weight.

A daily session of housework can reduce the risk of breast cancer, experts have suggested.

Hoovering, dusting and other domestic chores provide the gentle exercise needed to keep generally fit and maintain a healthy weight.

This in turn reduces levels of cancerpromoting hormones secreted by body fat and counters the threat of a disease which claims 1,000 lives a month in the UK.

A study of more than 200,000 women showed that those who spend a few hours a day on household chores are up to 30 per cent less likely to succumb.

Cancer experts said it showed that women do not need to take part in highly strenuous sports or spend a fortune on gym membership to stay healthy. Gentle but regular exercise around the home was actually found to be more beneficial.

Dr Lesley Walker, of Cancer Research UK, which part-funded the study, said: "We already know that women who keep a healthy weight are less likely to develop breast cancer.

"This study suggests that being physi- cally active may also help reduce the risk and that doing something as simple and cheap as doing the housework can help.

"We want to see men and women taking regular exercise and maintaining a healthy body weight to help prevent cancer."

The Government recommends exercising five times a week for 30 minutes or more for optimum health.

The researchers, including experts from Imperial College, London, tracked the health of 220,000 women from nine European countries for six and a half years.

By the end of the study, 3,423 had developed breast cancer.

Analysis of the women's lifestyle revealed a clear link between physical activity, and in particular the exercise included in housework, and the development of the disease.

Among younger women, those who did the most housework were 29 per cent less likely to be diagnosed with the cancer than those who were inactive around the home.

Chores cited included cleaning, washing, cooking, childcare, gardening and DIY.

Other types of exercise, including organised sports and cycling, were not found to affect the risk of the cancer in women who had not yet been through the menopause.

For older women, all types of exercise cut the risk of breast cancer.

However, the link was still strongest with housework. Those who did the most were 19 per cent less likely to develop the disease.

On average, the younger women did almost 18 hours of housework a week, while those who had reached the menopause spent around 16 hours a week on chores.

Writing in the journal Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers, the researchers said: "Our results provide evidence that moderate forms of physical activity, such as household activity, may be more important than less frequent but more intense recreational physical activity in reducing breast cancer risk."

The number of cases of breast cancer in Britain has almost doubled in a generation. Almost 37,000 women in England and Wales were diagnosed with the disease in 2004, 10 per cent more than in the previous year and 80 per cent more than in 1971. Experts blame the ageing population and changes in lifestyle and diet.

Advances in treatment and regular screening mean more victims survive, however. Two-thirds of women diagnosed with breast cancer today will still be alive in 20 years. The survival rate was only 50 per cent in the early 1990s.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

