TITLE	Smear tests: the facts

by NAOMI COLEMAN, femail.co.uk

Cervical cancer is the second most common cancer among women and affects around 2,800 women a year.

Around 1,000 women die from the illness a year - but if detected early, the disease is preventable.

Here is a guide to the two different types of smear tests.

What is the Pap smear?

The Pap smear - the smear test currently used by the NHS - is a test to detect early changes in the cervix indicating that a person is at risk of developing cervical cancer if not treated.

The test is conducted on a small sample of cells obtained from the cervix which are spread on a glass microscope slide. The slide is then examined under the microscope in the laboratory for any abnormal cells. If abnormal cells are detected, you may be recalled for a repeat Pap smear, or referred for a colposcopy examination.

What is HPV?

HPV or Human Papillomavirus is a common viral infection, which is transmitted sexually. The majority of people carry HPV without suffering any ill health.

Out of around 100 known types of HPV, thirteen are found to be high-risk and have been demonstrated to be linked with cervical cancer.

Some types of HPV cause genital warts. These are not related to cancer, but you should seek medical help if they appear. Your doctor will check out any potential HPV infection in your cervix.

What is the role of HPV in the development of cervical cancer?

Most people come into contact with HPV at some time in their lives and will normally clear the virus from their body within a few months (like a cold or flu).

However, a small minority of women will not clear the virus and will have a higher than normal risk of developing cervical abnormalities. Persistent infection with HPV can lead to cell changes, which if left untreated, could develop into cervical cancer.

Who is most at risk from contracting HPV?

You are at greater risk of becoming infected by HPV if you became sexually active at an early age. If you - or your partner - have had multiple sex partners, and if your sexual partners have a history of other sexually transmitted diseases. Smokers are also less able to shake off the HPV virus.

Is it possible to test for HPV?

Yes, the HPV Test can detect the presence of high-risk types of HPV even before there are any visible changes to the cells of the cervix, which means that women at risk of cervical cancer can be identified much earlier.

A positive HPV test does not mean that you will develop cervical cancer, but it does provide your doctor with additional information about potential risks to your health and enable your doctor to monitor you more closely.

Any signs of developing disease can therefore be detected earlier enabling effective treatment. It also means that if you have a negative HPV test result then you have the reassurance of knowing that your chance of developing cervical cancer is negligible.

A negative Pap smear result combined with a negative HPV result means that you can be 97 per cent sure that you will not develop cervical disease within the next 5 years.

Do I need a Pap smear and HPV test?

Current research indicates that the most effective method for detecting the early signs of cervical cancer is a Pap smear together with an HPV test. This combined approach has been shown to detect around 97 per cent of high-grade cervical disease.

The HPV test can provide additional information regarding the significance of any abnormalities detected on your Pap smear. It has been well documented that the majority of abnormalities disappear on their own, but until the HPV test, there has been no method to distinguish which will progress to more serious disease.

How is the HPV specimen collected for testing?

The specimen is collected in the same way as for the Pap smear - via a sample of cells taken from the cervix. The sample is then placed into a liquid - called liquid cytology - unlike a Pap test where the cells are put directly onto a slide. The use of liquid means that the cells do not separate and are more evenly distributed. This promotes more accurate reading in the lab.

Where can I get an HPV test?

Wellcare Woman Care Clinics, telephone 0808 100 3133, or visit www.wellcare.co.uk.

The Doctor's Laboratory, telephone 020 7460 4800, or visit www.tdlplc.co.uk.

Marie Stopes Clinics, telephone 020 7388 0662, Manchester, 0161 832 1931, or Leeds 0113 244 6645, or visit www.mariestopes.org.uk

Where can I find the latest news on NHS HPV testing?

Call The HPV Information Line, 0800 018 7505, or visit www.womenforhpvtesting.org.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

