TITLE	Sunbed skin cancer danger has trebled

By FIONA MACRAE

Last updated at 22:17 29 January 2007

The risk of developing skin cancer from using sunbeds has trebled in just a decade, experts have warned.

The demand for an instant tan has led to the marketing of super-powerful sunbeds, with four in five breaking safety standards.

The extra-strong sun lamps emit between two and three times as much harmful UV light as those used just ten years ago - raising the risk of skin cancer by the same amount, research shows.

The warning comes amid growing concern that children as young as 11 are using sunbeds in a quest to gain a tan like that of their favourite celebrities.

Rates of skin cancer have more than doubled in the last decade, with 70,000 Britons diagnosed each year.

Sunbeds are blamed for 100 of the 2,000 lives lost annually to skin cancer in the UK, with studies showing that using sunbeds as a teenager dramatically increases the risk of skin cancer.

Despite growing evidence about the dangers of sunbeds, there is little to stop youngsters from using them, with government guidelines which strongly advise tanning salons to turn away under-16s not legally binding.

In addition, many sunbeds are coin-operated, allowing customers to use them for long periods at a time.

Calling for tighter regulation on sunbed use, researcher Dr Harry Moseley, a medical physicist, said: "I think that sunbeds should be regulated and there should be a licensing system.

"It would force them to ensure information is given to the public, so that people know they're increasing their risk of skin cancer.

"The more you use them the more you increase your risk. If people want to use them and it makes them feel good then that's their decision, but they should know what they're getting into.

"Apart from anything else, you are also going to look saggy and older than you are. People use them to look beautiful, and end up looking old and saggy."

His call was echoed by MPs, with Labour MP Rosie Cooper saying: "Coin-operated, unstaffed operations are irresponsible and should be closed down as soon as possible."

Dr Moseley, who will speak at a Society for Radiological Protection conference in London, tested 133 sunbeds in tanning studios, beauty salons, sports centres, hotel leisure complexes, hairdressers and video shops.

He found that 83 per cent of the sunbeds had UV light outputs above the British and European safety standard.

When the results were compared to a previous survey carried out in Scotland in 1997, it became clear that the risk of developing skin cancer from sunbed use is now is now up to three times higher.

The researcher, from Ninewells Hospital in Dundee, also found that many of the sunbeds were unsupervised and coin-operated, with no age limit or restrictions on the number of sessions.

Cancer charities have added their voices to the call for tighter regulation of sunbed use.

Sara Hiom, of Cancer Research UK, said: "We support Dr Moseley?s recommendation for a licensing scheme for sunbeds.

"This could ensure that all tanning facilities meet a number of minimum health, safety and good practice guidelines.

"We believe that people under 18 should never use sunbeds.

"As it is impossible to check ages at unmanned sunbed salons it would be better if those outlets with coin-operated sunbeds were closed down.

"While adults are free to make their own decisions about using sunbeds it is important that they should be fully informed of the risks involved such as the increased skin cancer risk for people with fair skin."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

