TITLE	The motorists on collision course with skin cancer

Last updated at 22:33 04 February 2007

Frequent driving may increase the risk of developing skin cancer, research suggests.

Studies have shown that sunlight coming in through the side windows of cars could be to blame for the increase.

The windows block the UVB rays that cause sunburn but not the deeper-penetrating UVA rays which are linked to skin cancer. Windscreens, made of laminated glass, can block both.

Researchers in the U.S. claim drivers who roll down the side windows are at an even greater risk.

The scientists from St Louis University School of Medicine in Missouri looked at 898 patients - 559 men and 339 women - with skin cancer on either side of their bodies.

Among the men, the rate of cancers directly correlated to the areas of the body most often exposed to ultraviolet radiation when driving -which in the U.S., where cars are left-hand drive, is the left side of the body.

Many of the tumours in the study were of the type linked to slow exposure to the sun over a long period, rather than intense, intermittent exposure - such as that experienced by sunbed users.

Affected areas were the head, neck, hands and arms - all areas exposed to the sun when driving.

Lead author Dr Scott Fosko said: "This finding supports our theory that drivers who regularly spend more hours in the car over the course of several years are more likely to develop skin cancer on the left side of the body; particularly skin cancers that develop gradually over time."

Dr Fosko?s team has now begun to gather detailed information on the driving habits of skin cancer patients they see in their clinic.

Initial data shows those who spend the most time per week driving a car are more likely to develop left-sided cancers.

Men in the study sat in cars for longer per week than women - ten hours on average to eight - and they were far more likely to sit on the dridrivever?s side than women (91 per cent to 68 per cent).

The study showed that men were twice as likely to suffer from left-sided skin cancer as women.

Younger women were more likely than older women to suffer from left-sided skin cancer - tallying with a finding that younger women were more likely to sit on the driver?s side than older women.

Dr Fosko said: "We?re also finding that all drivers who occasionally with the windows open had a higher incidence of left-sided cancers.

"Since there are more cars on the road than ever before, it is likely that this trend will continue.

"And with more women driving, we are likely to see higher reports if left-sided skin cancers in women in the future."

He suggested that car manufacturers could save lives by tinting the glass of side windows or by using UV filters.

The study suggests that in the UK, with motorists sitting in the right front seat, driving would lead to more skin cancers on that side of the body.

Dr Fosko said that similar studies conducted in countries where the driver?s seat is on the right side of the vehicle had found similar distributions of skin cancers on the right side of the head, face and arm.

A spokesman for Cancer Research UK said: "Although glass greatly reduces the risk of sunburn, it does not prevent long-term damage from UVA.

"So if you are driving long distances or sitting in your conservatory every day for long periods of time, with the sun beaming in on you, then you are putting yourself at risk."

But she added: "In terms of the amount of ultraviolet sunlight people are exposed to during the course of a year, the amount received through car windows is likely to be a very small percentage.

"It is important to take care whenever you are exposed to the sun, to know your skin type and, above all, never burn as this can double your risk of skin cancer."

Around 40,500 cases of skin cancer are diagnosed in Britain a year, of which 6,000 are malignant melanomas - the most dangerous type.

Around 1,500 die from melanomas in the UK every year.

In cases where skin cancer is detected early, however, there is a 99 per cent clear-up rate.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

