TITLE	Sunshine myths exposed

By CLAIRE BATES

Last updated at 13:13 26 February 2007

Most people know too much sunlight can damage the skin and most skin cancers are caused by damage from the sun's ultraviolet rays. But there are still a number of myths surrounding sun protection.

As we experience record warm temperatures this year we expose the facts:

MYTH ONE

A SPF suncream with UVB protection will fully protect your skin.

Exposed

There are two main types of damaging ultraviolet (UV) sunlight, UVA and UVB. The SPF factor refers to how much protection the cream gives from dangerous UVB rays, which can burn and cause damage to the skin.

However, UVA can also age the skin and damage deeper layers. Use a 'broad spectrum' suncream to protect your skin from all UV light.

MYTH TWO

You only need to apply suncream once as long as you let it sink in.

Exposed

While you should allow half-an-hour for your suncream to sink in you should not assume it will protect you all day. You need to reapply at least every two hours and always after swimming - even if the suncream says it is waterproof.

Children's skin is more sensitive to sun damage and needs extra protection. Experts believe that sunburn during childhood can significantly increase your risk of the skin cancer malignant melanoma.

MYTH THREE

You don't need to worry about sun protection on a cloudy day.

Exposed

This is a commonly believed myth. In fact most of the UV radiation from sunshine still comes through thin cloud. Thick cloud gives partial protection.

MYTH FOUR

All sunglasses protect your eyes from harmful rays.

Exposed

Not all sunglasses protect against UV light so check that your pair does. A wrap around style gives extra protection.

MYTH FIVE

Low-factor sunscreens are fine if you tan easily.

Exposed

Suncreams that are less than factor 15 do not give much protection against the sun. Always use a factor 15 or above. Suncreams can go off so check the 'use by' date on the bottle. Most have a shelf life of two to three years.

MYTH SIX

You can build up a healthy tan.

Exposed

There is no such thing as a healthy tan. A tan is a 'warning sign' that the sun is damaging the skin. UVA light ages the skin and causing wrinkles, while UVB light can cause deeper burns.

MYTH SEVEN

Swimming in a T-shirt will keep your skin protected.

Exposed

Although a wet T-shirt will provide some skin protection, wet clothes let through more UV light than dry clothes do. Take spare clothes to change into if you plan to get wet.

MYTH EIGHT

You don't need sun protection up a mountain where it is cold.

Exposed

The suns rays are actually more powerful at higher altitudes. So although it feels cooler up a mountain your skin will burn quicker that at sea-level. Cover up the skin with long sleeves, a hat and wrap around sunglasses. Use a suncream on your face and sunblock on your lips, nose and ears.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

