TITLE	The breast cancer breakthrough saving 1,000 women a year

By JENNY HOPE

Last updated at 10:51 13 February 2007

A new drug for breast cancer could save the lives of more than 1,000 women a year.

A study has shown that those with early breast cancer live longer if they switch from the Health Service's standard drug, tamoxifen, to newly-developed treatments.

Death rates were 17 per cent lower in women who changed from tamoxifen after two or three years and spent a further two years on a drug called exemestane.

The charity Cancer Research UK, whose scientists were involved in the study, said the treatment regime would prevent an estimated 1,300 deaths each year if used systematically across Britain.

Exemestane, also known as Aromasin, is one of a group of drugs called aromatase inhibitors.

Three were licensed for NHS use last November.

The approval means that many of the 23,000 women who are diagnosed with breast cancer every year should be eligible for the drugs, while thousands of others are expected to switch from their current treatments.

Professor Charles Coombes, director of the Cancer Research UK laboratories and head of cancer medicine at Imperial College, London, said: 'Tamoxifen has already saved the lives of many breast cancer patients.

'Our latest research shows that we can build on that success by treating women first with tamoxifen then switching to the new drug, exemestane.

'This is the first time any hormone treatment has been shown to reduce the death rate more than tamoxifen alone.

'Switching drugs also seems to avoid the side- effects of longterm tamoxifen therapy, such as cancer of the womb and deepvein thrombosis.'

The latest findings, published today in the online edition of The Lancet medical journal, are from a study of 4,742 women who were treated for five years and monitored for a further three.

They were randomly assigned either to a full five years of tamoxifen, or to treatment with tamoxifen followed by exemestane.

Giving women tamoxifen after surgery reduced the risk of dying by 33 per cent compared with giving them no treatment.

After another two to three years of exemestane, plus a further three years of post-treatment follow-up, survival was found to be significantly improved.

The chances of dying were 50 per cent lower than they would have been with no chemotherapy, and 17 per cent lower than without making the switch from tamoxifen.

Patients who switched were also 25 per cent less likely to see their cancer return.

Tamoxifen works by interfering with the activity of the hormone oestrogen - which fuels the growth of some tumours.

Aromatase inhibitors block production of oestrogen in a woman's body.

Researchers believe the combination of the two drugs is so effective because some cancer cells become resistant to tamoxifen during treatment, but the exemestane kills them off.

Professor John Toy, Cancer Research UK's medical director, said: 'These results are really very encouraging because they suggest that a sequence of tamoxifen and exemestane could help reduce breast cancer deaths.

'We will continue to follow the results of this study to see how the women fare in the long term.'

The Government's rationing watchdog NICE approved three aromatase inhibitors - Arimidex, Femara and Aromasin - alongside tamoxifen in November and NHS primary care trusts are expected to fund them.

Dr Emma Pennery, nurse consultant at Breast Cancer Care, said: 'These updated results confirm that the benefits of using aromatase inhibitor drugs are sustained over time.

'The results could help to inform when and how to use this type of drug in the most effective way. Aromasin is already licensed and has been approved for use by NICE, so people should already have access to it throughout the UK.'

Dr Alexis Willett, senior policy and information officer at Breakthrough Breast Cancer, said: 'Previous studies had already shown that after switching from tamoxifen, exemestane could reduce the risk of breast cancer returning.

'This new evidence shows that it could also improve overall chance of survival.

'Aromatase inhibitors like exemestane now increase the treatment options available for breast cancer patients.

'However it is important to remember that they are not suitable for everyone. Anyone concerned about their treatment should speak to their doctor.'

BBC presenter Sadie Nine was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2005 and has been treated with tamoxifen for the past 18 months

Miss Nine, 49, who works on BBC Essex's breakfast show, said she was delighted at news of the trial results.

She said: 'This is fantastic. I am due to see my specialist next week.

'I have to use tamoxifen for two years, until June, and then I will take this new drug for another three years - unless of course something better comes along before then.

Miss Nine, of East London, added: 'My doctor-has been talking about this drug for a long time. The side effects are supposed to be much less and the survival rates are greater. I don't have cancer any more but this treatment will make sure it doesn't come back.

'We rely so much on the oncologists and you really have to trust you are getting the best treatment.

'I am getting married in September and the drugs I am taking at the moment have made me put on a lot of weight.

'Now perhaps I have a chance of being a slim bride!'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

