TITLE	A 34inch waist doubles the risk of womb cancer

by JENNY HOPE

Last updated at 22:57 19 February 2007

The average British woman - with a 34 inch waist - has double the risk of womb cancer compared to one with a waist just three inches smaller, says an international study.

The current obesity epidemic means women now have a much higher risk of womb cancer than their counterparts 50 years ago.

A wartime diet and more exercise protected women in the 1950s from this form of cancer, and gave them a profile that was, on average, six inches trimmer than today.

Researchers say that losing three inches or more off the waistline would halve the chances of developing the disease.

The research also found women who piled on the pounds during adulthood were at much higher risk of womb cancer than those nwho became wider at a younger age.

Findings from a study of almost a quarter of a million women show expanding waistlines are to blame for a surge in cases over the last decade.

More than 5,500 women are diagnosed each year with cancer of the womb lining, or endometrial cancer, which is 19 per cent up compared with the early 1990s.

Around 1,000 women are killed by the disease each year.

A study part-funded by the Cancer Research UK charity shows women with a 34in waist have nearly double the risk compared with those whose waists are 31in or less.

Women who are obese - with a body mass index of 30 or more - and women who have put on more than 44lb since the age of 20 have almost double the risk.

Scientists working for the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) project analysed data from 223,000 women across 10 European countries.

They found a 'particularly strong' link in in postmenopausal women and those who had never taken hormone replacement therapy (HRT) or used the contraceptive pill.

Dr Lesley Walker, director of cancer information for Cancer Research UK, said 'According to the National Sizing Survey conducted in 2004 the average British woman now has a 34in waist, which is over 6in bigger than the average size of a woman in the 1950s, when it was 27.5in.

"Today's women are larger than they were when they existed on a wartime diet and were generally more active and this is having serious consequences for their health.

"The results of this study confirm that women carrying excess weight are much more likely to develop endometrial cancer than those women who are a normal weight."

Professor Christine Friedenreich, of the Alberta Cancer Board in Canada, who led the study, said: "This large study has provided very strong evidence that obesity and fat distribution increase endometrial cancer risk."

The findings add to evidence of the dangers of carrying a spare tyre around the middle for men and women.

Previous research found the risk of heart disease and diabetes is increased fourfold in men with waists of more than 40ins and in women whose waists exceed 35ins.

As many as one in five deaths from cancer is caused by being fat, with around 26,000 deaths from the disease each year being avoidable if adults kept to a healthy weight.

Doctors have diagnosed the link, but have been able to explain it yet.

A big waist is deemed even more hazardous for health than just being overweight because fat cells carried around the stomach pump out chemicals that can damage the insulin system, raise blood pressure and increase cholesterol levels.

Professor John Toy, medical director of Cancer Research UK, said: "While the general link between obesity and cancer is known, this study adds specific evidence that overweight women face a significantly increased risk of endometrial cancer.

"Cancer Research UK's Reduce the Risk campaign aims to raise awareness of how we can all help to prevent cancer by improving our lifestyles.

"Keeping a healthy weight by eating a low-fat, high-fibre diet with plenty of fruit and vegetables and taking regular exercise is one way to combat cancer risk."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

