TITLE	Cough syrup - the new cure for prostate cancer

By PAT HAGAN

Last updated at 17:51 06 March 2007

An ingredient used in cough medicine for more than 50 years could be a powerful new treatment for prostate cancer.

Noscapine, a drug derived from opium, has been found to stunt tumour growth and reduce the risk of cancer spreading by up to 65 per cent.

Now other studies are under way to see if it could help fight cancer of the breast, lungs and ovaries, as well as lymphoma - a tumour that affects the lymph nodes under the arm.

Although the drug's anti-cancer properties were first recognised back in the Sixties, in-depth studies have only taken place in recent years as drug companies have stepped up the search for new and powerful cancer treatments.

The drug is used in over-thecounter products, such as Vicks Dry Cough medicine, because it is highly effective at stopping coughs.

Although opium is the main source of noscapine, it is also found in tiny quantities in tomatoes and cabbage leaves.

The latest findings, by U.S. scientists, were presented at a recent prostate cancer conference in Colorado.

Experts at the Prostate Cancer Research and Educational Foundation in San Diego carried out laboratory tests to verify the drug's ability to fight cancer.

Mice were fed doses of the drug and their cancers were closely monitored to see what effect the cough-syrup ingredient had.

Study leader Dr Israel Barken, who claims to have been using noscapine on prostate cancer patients for more than a decade, said the results confirmed the drug was effective and safe.

It slowed tumour growth by 60 per cent and reduced the risk of it spreading to other parts of the body by 65 per cent.

'Incredibly, this was achieved with no toxicity,' he said. 'It demonstrates noscapine's potential as an effective anticancer agent - and a very safe one, too.'

Prostate cancer is the most common type of tumour in men in the UK, accounting for almost one in four male cancers. Each year, nearly 32,000 men are diagnosed with the disease and more than 10,000 die from it.

Many patients undergo surgery to remove the prostate gland, or are given a treatment called brachy-therapy, in which radioactive seeds are injected into the tumour to kill it.

Advanced cases of cancer are treated with drugs to lower the amount of testosterone in the body. In many cases of prostate cancer, the male hormone speeds up tumour growth.

Dr Moche Rogosnitzky, from the MedInsight Research Institute in Delaware, America, which helped fund the research, said: 'Noscapine has been used for cough suppression for close to half a century. Recent discoveries are pointing to its effectiveness in treating a broad variety of cancers.'

The drug is thought to work by interfering with the way cancer cells divide, stopping tumours from growing rapidly.

Previous studies involving human breast cancer tumours implanted into mice showed the cough-medicine drug was able to shrink the lump by 80 per cent within three weeks.

One of its biggest advantages could be that it seems to work well when taken as a pill, capsule or syrup. Currently, with chemotherapy, most drugs have to be injected.

Dr Kat Arney, from Cancer Research UK, said that although noscapine had still to be tested on cancer in humans, it could be an effective new treatment.

'Noscapine could prove useful as a prostate cancer therapy. It will be interesting to see if the results from clinical trials in humans show if it is more effective than existing treatments.'

 However, further research is required and, in the meantime, the researchers advise against taking cough mixture as a preventive.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

