TITLE	Mouthwash test for breast cancer

by PAT HAGAN

Last updated at 08:44 13 March 2007

A new mouthwash test can predict a woman's risk of breast cancer years before the disease sets in.

It works by collecting DNA samples from the lining of the cheeks and studying them for genetic activity linked with the development of cancer.

Called Oncovue, the test costs &pound;550 and is being launched in the UK this week. It can tell a woman in her 20s or 30s how likely she is to develop the disease, and at what stage in her life.

Those pinpointed as high risk could opt to have annual mammograms from a young age, rather than wait for three-yearly NHS screening to begin at 50.

The test predicts each patient's risk as she passes through three age groups: below 44, 45 to 54, and over 55.

Scientists behind the test hope it will save the lives of some women who get breast cancer before the menopause, while reassuring others that their risk is low.

If it shows a high risk in a woman while she is under 44, then it is for breast important to start mammography screening early, says Dr James Mackay, a cancer specialist from University College London and managing director of the test's UK distributor, Opaldia.

Or if it shows a woman's risk is highest in her 50s, she might want annual private checks rather than three-yearly on the NHS. Private mammograms cost around &pound;300.

Around 40,000 women a year in Britain are diagnosed with breast cancer, and the disease affects one in nine women at some point in their lives.

Around one in ten cases are caused by two particular genes, called BRCA1 and BRCA2, which dramatically increase the chances of disease at an early age. But the vast majority are what's known as sporadic cancer, where there is no obvious trigger factor.

The new test is aimed at detecting the risk of sporadic cancer and works by examining the genetic activity in a group of ten enzymes that are involved in breaking down the female hormone oestrogen.

Prolonged exposure to high levels of oestrogen is known to be one of the risk factors for breast cancer.

Oncovue analyses the genetic variations in these enzymes and looks for certain combinations.

This gives scientists what they call a genetic 'signature' - a picture of how well the enzymes will do at keeping oestrogen levels in the body under control throughout life.

By matching the results up with a database of 8,000 women with and without cancer, scientists can predict at what stage in life a woman's cancer risk is greatest.

Dr MacKay explains that the patient swills a few teaspoonfuls of mouthwash around in her mouth for 30 seconds, then spits it back into a container. This gives enough cells from the cheeks to do the test.

Samples are sent to a laboratory in Oklahoma, home of InterGenetics, the firm which developed the test.

The Oncovue test will initially be available at private hospitals such as the London Clinic and Nuffield hospitals in Tunbridge Wells and Cheltenham.

A small group of British patients have already used the mouthwash to assess their risk. One was a woman in her early 30s with a strong family history of breast cancer - but the test showed her risk was normal, or no higher than the general population.

Another patient in her early 30s, with a mild family history of the disease, found her greatest risk was below the age of 44. She has decided to start annual mammograms from the age of 35.

But Dr Julie Sharp, senior scientific officer at Cancer Research UK, sounded a note of caution. She said: "Scientists are making great progress in unravelling the genetic faults that influence breast cancer risk, but this type of DNA testing can't yet supply all the answers.

"There is a danger that this type of test could cause unnecessary anxiety for some women. It could give others a false sense of security: "low risk" does not mean "no risk".

"Cancer Research UK's advice to women remains unchanged - be breast aware, report any changes to your doctor promptly, and attend screening appointments when invited, as early detection is important for successful treatment."

www.opaldia.com

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

