TITLE	How purple grape juice is great for your heart

by JULIE WHELDON

Last updated at 11:45 19 March 2007

A glass of purple grape juice a day will leave you feeling in the pink.

It is the most effective of all fruit juices at preventing heart disease and cancer, according to research.

Scroll down for more... 

Click enlarge for a bigger image

A glass of purple grape juice is the most effective of all fruit juices at preventing heart disease and cancer

Scientists found it had the highest concentration of antioxidants - chemicals which help to neutralise unstable oxygen molecules called free radicals.

If left unchecked, these molecules can harm cells, playing a role in everything from ageing to cancer.

It has long been known that fruit contains antioxidants called polyphenols, but researchers at the University of Glasgow wanted to see how much remained once fruit had been turned into juice.

They tested 13 types from a supermarket, including those made from pomegranates, grapefruit, apples, pineapples and tomatoes.

They were a mixture of 'not from concentrate' and 'concentrated' varieties.

A drink made from purple Concord grapes had the greatest level of antioxidants, with cloudy apple, tropical and cranberry juices coming in next.

Generally the darker juices were best, with purple grapes having the highest levels of polyphenols, according to the study published in the Journal of Agriculture and Food Chemistry.

The winning juice, Welch's Purple Grape, was made from a variety of grapes known as Concord which are native to North America. These contained as many antioxidants as Beaujolais red wine.

The next best drink was Copella's cloudy apple juice.

The researchers said that it might not just be the amount of antioxidants, but also the type contained in a juice, that determine its potential health benefits.

Professor Alan Crozier, who led the study, said: "Previous research has shown that the antioxidant action of polyphenols contained in drinks like red wine and tea may help to protect against chronic diseases, by mopping up free radicals which can cause damage to cells.

"Yet the research highlights that not all drinks are created equal when it comes to polyphenols.

"It's therefore important to consider the individual type of the compounds that you are consuming, because each has different health benefits."

Nutritionist Nigel Denby said the research showed that consumers must aim to get a broad spectrum of antioxidants in their diet.

"Nutritionists recommend consuming five portions of fruit and vegetables every day to get the antioxidants your body needs, and this can seem like a tall order," he said.

"Using these study findings makes upping your fruit and antioxidant intake easy - just one glass of something like Concord purple grape juice counts as one of your five a day."

And there's another reason to drink up - last year researchers found that having fruit and vegetable juices more than three times a week can dramatically cut the risk of developing Alzheimer's Disease.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

