TITLE	The twins who both got cancer...twice

by JAYA NARAIN

Last updated at 10:39 20 March 2007

Idenical twins Amanda Firth and Debbie Crowder are used to sharing almost every aspect of their lives together.

So when they were both diagnosed with breast cancer just a year apart they pulled together to fight the life-threatening disease.

The 38-year-old sisters had to fight cancer - not once, but twice, after they both suffered a life-threatening recurrence.

Cancer experts say the chances of twin sisters being diagnosed with breast cancer is rare but for both to suffer a recurrence is more than one in a million.

Mrs Firth, a commercial manager for a supermarket chain, first discovered she had the disease in March 2000 after finding a painful pea-sized lump on her left breast when she was 30 weeks pregnant  with her daughter, Olivia.

Doctors at Chorley Hospital, Lancashire allowed the pregnancy to continue for four more weeks before Olivia was born by caesarean section.

Mrs Firth was given two weeks to recover before having a mastectomy and reconstruction of her left breast followed by six months of chemotherapy.

She said: "Debbie was my rock throughout my ordeal, even coming with me to the hairdresser's when I had my hair cut very short before I began chemotherapy."

However two months after completing treatment in May 2001, her sister was diagnosed with cancer after finding a small lump under her right arm while taking a shower.

"I didn`t panic as I really had been expecting this, though I didn't tell Amanda until my doctor referred me for a biopsy," said Mrs Crowder, a department manager who lives in Bolton, Lancashire and is divorced with a son, Joseph, seven.

In July 2001 Mrs Crowder had a partial mastectomy followed by a gruelling six months of chemotherapy but both sisters gave each other support.

In June 2003 she underwent a reconstruction of her right breast  but in November 2004 she was horrified to find a lump in her left breast. Doctors diagnosed a grade three malignant tumour and she underwent another mastectomy and reconstruction before steeling herself for the inevitable chemotherapy.

But the recurrence of the cancer forced Mrs Firth, who lives in Chorley with her IT manager husband Andrew, 40, to confront the possibility she too could suffer a relapse.

She said: "I had always been told our cancer was coincidental but it seemed too much to accept it as double bad luck - even though I had been in remission for nearly four years.  

"Once Debbie's cancer recurred my consultant agreed to carry out an MRI scan in April 2005 and I was shocked - but not surprised - when this revealed I had a grade three tumour in my right breast."

She underwent a mastectomy and reconstruction followed by chemotherapy before both twins were referred to the Family History Clinic in Manchester which examines hereditary links of the disease.

Their consultant, Professor Gareth Evans, a breast cancer geneticist, said it was extremely rare for twins to be diagnosed with the disease and he had never known sisters to both suffer a recurrence.

The women have also been fundraising with the breast cancer charity Genesis which is dedicated to building Europe's first breast cancer Prevention centre in the UK. Mrs Crowder said: "This has been a devastating time which has rocked our whole family. But in a way Amanda and I have been lucky - which other breast cancer sufferers have someone so close who really can help them every step of the way."

Now the twins are looking to put cancer behind them though they will have to undergo hysterectomies to avoid developing ovarian cancer.

One in 10 breast cancers are caused by a defective gene known as BRCA 1 or 2 and carriers have an 85 per cent chance of developing not only breast but ovarian cancer.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

