TITLE	Hope for ‘incurable’ prostate patients

By MARTYN HALLE

Last updated at 12:46 20 March 2007

A new form of radiotherapy may offer hope to thousands of men who have an incurable stage of prostate cancer.

Scientists have developed a machine that allows high doses of radiation to be delivered to the tumour without damaging healthy tissue. Cancer specialists are optimistic it will lead to patients living longer, because the disease can be better controlled, or even cured.

Normal radiation treatment often spills over into surrounding healthy tissue, restricting the dosage that can be used safely.

While healthy tissue can recover from exposure to radiation, certain organs can be damaged, affecting their ability to function. In prostate cancer, those organs most at risk are the bladder and bowel. Excessive doses can cause incontinence.

With the new technology ? known as Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy (IMRT) ? a more precise beam of radiation can be produced. It means doctors can use higher doses of radiotherapy to kill the cancer, safe in the knowledge they are targeting only the tumour and that any "collateral damage" is minimised.

Early indications from the U.S. suggest this radiotherapy treatment is groundbreaking. Results from Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Centre in New York show that IMRT can control the spread of tumours better than conventional radiotherapy.

Patients were given between 13 and 25 per cent more radiation than normal. The treatment?s effectiveness in controlling the size of the tumour and stopping its spread was 94 per cent (compared with 43 per cent for conventional radiotherapy).

Trials of IMRT in Britain are being carried out on prostate and head and neck cancer patients at London?s Royal Marsden Hospital by Dr Vincent Khoo and Dr David Dearnley. Although Dr Khoo is cautious about the UK trial (a five-year study with two years still to go), he says: "there is a good deal of optimism that it will prove to be a significant advance.

"There is a logic that says if you give a more powerful, intense dose of radiation than normal, you will get a better result. But we won?t know for certain until we fully analyse the trial findings in a few years."

One of the patients in the British trial is Professor Paul Forster, a business studies expert who is also chairman of the Prostate Cancer Charity. He was diagnosed with advanced prostate cancer six years ago and says he expected to die within a few years.

"My Prostate Specific Antigen test (PSA) was very high at 75, and after scans I was told the cancer had spread beyond the prostate and was probably in my bones," he says.

"It was too advanced for surgery and I was not suitable for existing radiotherapy, so doctors at Hammersmith Hospital put me on hormone-herapy drugs to cut back testosterone, which is known to help the cancer grow. Remarkably, that worked for four years and I was able to lead an almost normal life."

But in September 2005, when there were signs the therapy was no longer containing the disease, Professor Forster started seven weeks of IMRT treatment, five days a week.

"We were able to give Professor Forster a 30 per cent higher dose of radiation to his pelvis than would be normal," says Dr Khoo. "This is because we were able to focus the dose.

"The IMRT treatment appears to have been effective. However, it is still too early to conclusively determine his outcome."

Tests after treatment ended showed Professor Forster?s PSA blood levels had dropped to a very low 0.18. This indicates that the disease is almost certainly not active and spreading, or might not have survived the radiotherapy.

Prostate Cancer Charity: 0800 074 8383; www.prostatecancer.org.uk.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

