TITLE	'Permatan' generation left with damaged skin aged 24

by FIONA MACRAE

Last updated at 14:12 22 March 2007

Teenagers are ignoring dire warnings from skin cancer specialists in their search for the perfect tan.

By the age of 24 almost half have damaged the skin on their faces through years of sunbathing.

Exposure to UV rays has developed moles, freckles and liverspots, a survey of 500 young women revealed.

Yet more than one in ten admitted they applied sunscreen only after their skin was already burned - and one in 12 said they never used it at all.

This is despite alarming statistics showing that rates of skin cancer more than doubled in the last decade, with 70,000 diagnosed each year leading to 2,000 deaths.

Youngsters are taking the biggest risk, according to skin care clinic group sk:n.

Two-thirds of the 500 young women they questioned said that, given a choice of buying make-up or sunscreen, they would rather spend their money on cosmetics.

Jane Lewis, a dermatological nurse at sk:n, warned that the sun can do damage year-round, and advised youngsters to factor sunscreen into their daily routine.

She said: "A good sun block should be part of everyone's daily regime as, even on cloudy days, the UV rays can still do damage.

"People should get in the habit of using sunscreen instead of moisturiser and choose a sunscreen of factor 30 or higher."

The clinic's warning comes amid growing concern that children as young as 11 are using sunbeds in their quest for a tan to match that of their favourite celebrity.

A study of 250 children from Knowsley, Merseyside, found that 8 per cent of 11 and 12-year-olds often used sunbeds.

Some salons even hold children's parties to entice young customers.

With many visiting tanning studios up to four times a week, doctors have termed the unhealthy obsession 'tanorexia'.

Teenager Hayley Barlow from West Derby, Liverpool, was warned that she could die from skin cancer if she could not break her habit of visiting salons five times a week.

"She started using sunbeds five years ago at 11 in a bid to emulate what she called "the beautiful skin" sported by celebrities in magazines.

Doctors say her tanning has already given her the skin of a 25-year-old and she is said to have cut down her salon visits to once a fortnight.

Jane Lewis said: "It is OK to use sunbeds now and again but using them weekly would be like asking for skin cancer.

"I can't see why people feel they have to be brown and crisp like a piece of toast to be attractive."

Recent research from the World Health Organisation has shown that teenagers using sunbeds are up to 75 per cent more likely to develop the most deadly form of skin cancer than those who start later in life.

It is thought that young skin is particularly vulnerable to damage from UV rays.

The researchers, who described the evidence as "unequivocal", called for young people to be banned from tanning salons.

While Government guidelines strongly advise against allowing youngsters to use sunbeds, their use is not banned by law.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

