TITLE	1 in 5 samples of American rice sold in Britain contains cancer-causing arsenic

by SEAN POULTER

Last updated at 16:53 23 March 2007

One in five packs of American long-grain rice contains potentially harmful levels of arsenic, according to a new study.

Experts at Aberdeen University claim people eating large quantities of the rice on a daily basis could suffer an increased risk of certain cancers.

Lead expert, Professor Andy Meharg said he actively avoids allowing his children to eat the suspect rice.

He suggested other consumers might take the same decision.

The Aberdeen team examined 107 samples of American long-grain rice grown in the US 'south central' belt of the USA - Arkansas, Louisiana and Mississippi. It also assessed 27 grown in California.

The team found the level of inorganic arsenic in the south central rice was three to five times higher than in the rice from California and other parts of the world.

The rice was purchased in the USA, however exactly this long grain variety from this same region is sold by UK supermarkets and specialist shops.

The Chinese government recently imposed an upper safety limit of inorganic arsenic contamination of 0.15mg per kilogram for rice.

Professor Meharg said 20 per cent of the samples his team examined from the south central area were above this threshold and so would be banned in China.

The UK and Europe operates to different standards of 1mg per kilo, however this has been in place since 1959.

Professor Meharg said: "The UK safety limit needs to be revised and updated to take into account research showing the impact of long-term chronic arsenic consumption. It should be around the figure used in China.

"We know if you are exposed to even low levels of arsenic over a decade then your risk of cancer will increase."

American long grain rice is normally imported to Britain at the rate of 10,000 tonnes a month, making up 30-40per cent of the market.

However, there is currently a temporary halt because U.S. imports of rice have been found to be tainted with illegal genetically modified varieties.

Sales of all rice have increased dramatically in recent years because it is perceived as relatively healthy. Parents are increasingly using it as a substitute for high fat foods such as chips.

The professor said: "I would always choose rice from a source that I knew was lower in arsenic. That is the choice I make for my children.

"If you were told that one bag of rice contains three to five times more (arsenic) than another bag of rice, what would you prefer to buy?

"We are far more health conscious about what we are eating nowadays and we know arsenic is carcinogenic."

Professor Meharg said while the research findings have implications for all consumers, they are particularly relevant to those communities who eat a lot of rice on a daily basis, particularly from the ethnic minorities.

He said: "Arsenic is a chronic carcinogen that has a measurable cancer risk. Those people who eat rice two or three times a day might want to think about where it is coming from."

Arsenic is believed to be particularly associated with a higher risk of bladder and lung cancer. Someone eating 100g of the rice a day with a relatively high level would have a 10-20 chance in 10,000 of developing cancer.

The chemical is found naturally in soil, however the rice contamination in the south central belt relates to land where cotton was once cultivated.

Professor Meharg said: "Cotton production relied heavily on arsenic pesticides. The result is that it left residues in the soils which are still there and is being picked up by the rice."

The research has been peer-reviewed by experts in the field and published in the Environmental Science and Technology journal.

Researchers from the School of Biological Sciences at the University of Aberdeen in Scotland now plan to examine the arsenic content of rice from European countries.

They will also investigate levels of the chemical which are present in rice-based products, such as rice cakes and baby food.

The USA Rice Federation, a producers group, denies any health risk.

A spokesman said: "There's been no incident (in which) arsenic and rice have led to any reported human health problem."

A spokesman for the UK Rice Association, said: "The results are similar results to those seen in the past. Yes, the arsenic appears to be relatively higher in rice from southern parts of the States than elsewhere.

"However, the levels are lower than those set for arsenic in food in this country."

He said consumers would need to eat 'an awful lot of rice' before they would get close to a harmful level.

The presence of arsenic is undesirable, but something immediately to get too excited about," he said.

"Plant biologists are actively trying to develop strains of rice that don't take up the arsenic so much."

The British Retail Consortium said the discovery should have no immediate impact on consumers because there is very little American long grain rice on shelves at the moment.

This is because shipments have been halted following the discovering of contamination with GM rice varieties which have not gone through EU safety assessment.

However, shipments will resume once this is resolved.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

