TITLE	Rice tainted by arsenic 'raises risk of cancer'

Last updated at 20:49 23 March 2007

One in five packs of American long-grain rice contains potentially harmful levels of arsenic, according to a study.

Experts at Aberdeen University claim that eating large quantities of the rice on a daily basis could increase the risk of certain cancers.

The team's leader, Professor Andy Meharg, said he does not let his children eat the suspect rice, and suggested other consumers might take the same decision.

The Aberdeen team examined 107 samples of American long-grain rice grown in the U.S. 'south central' belt - Arkansas, Louisiana and Mississippi, and 27 from California.

The level of inorganic arsenic in the south central rice was three to five times higher than in the rice from California and other parts of the world.

Arsenic is found naturally in soil, but the contamination in the south central belt relates to land where cotton was once cultivated.

Professor Meharg said:

'Cotton production relied heavily on arsenic pesticides. It left residues in the soils which are still there and is being picked up by the rice.'

China recently imposed an upper safety limit of inorganic arsenic contamination of 0.15mg per kilogram for rice.

Professor Meharg said 20 per cent of the samples from the south central area were above this threshold and so would be banned in China.

The UK and Europe operate to different standards of 1mg per kilo.

Professor Meharg said:

'The UK safety limit needs to be updated to take into account research showing the impact of long-term chronic arsenic consumption. It should be around the figure used in China.

'We know if you are exposed to even low levels of arsenic over a decade, your risk of cancer will increase.'

American long-grain rice is normally imported to Britain at the rate of 10,000 tons a month, making up 30-40 per cent of the market.

However, there is currently a temporary halt because U.S. rice has been found to be tainted with illegal genetically modified varieties.

Sales of all rice have increased dramatically in recent years because it is perceived as relatively healthy.

Parents are increasingly using it as a substitute for high fat foods such as chips.

The professor said: 'I would always choose rice from a source that I knew was lower in arsenic. That is the choice I make for my children.

'If you were told that one bag of rice contains three to five times more arsenic than another bag, what would you prefer to buy?'

He said while the findings have implications for all consumers, they are particularly relevant to communities which eat a lot of rice, particularly from the ethnic minorities.

He said: 'Those who eat rice two or three times a day might want to think about where it is coming from.'

Arsenic is believed to be particularly associated with a higher risk of bladder and lung cancer.

The U.S.A. Rice Federation, a producers' group, denies any health risk. A spokesman said:

'There's been no incident in which arsenic and rice have led to any reported human health problem.'

A spokesman for the UK Rice Association said:

'The results are similar to those seen in the past. Yes, the arsenic appears to be relatively higher in rice from southern parts of the States than elsewhere.

'However, the levels are lower than those set for arsenic in food in this country.'

He said consumers would need to eat 'an awful lot of rice' before nearing a harmful level.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

