TITLE	The breast super scan that finds tumours mammograms don't

by JOHN VON RADOWITZ

Last updated at 13:10 27 March 2007

A new kind of breast scan has been developed that pinpoints malignant tumours using harmless light instead of X-rays.

The technique highlights calcium crystals produced by cancerous cells in breast tissue.

Experts believe it could be especially useful for younger women and others who have dense breast tissue. In these cases deeply-buried tumours are often missed by conventional mammography scans.

Scroll down for more... 

Light beams spot tumours in young women that mammograms don't pick up

Using X-rays and the new imaging method together is likely to catch more cancers than mammography alone, say researchers.

The technique employs invisible near- cent cancers, hidden About age women, breasts. difficult benign The fact tumours particular infrared fluorescent light, and a combination of two chemicals that bind to specific calcium salt crystals.

One of the chemicals is bisphosphonate, a drug used to strengthen bone. The other is a 'fluorophore' which glows under the scanning light.

When the light is shone through breast tissue, any areas where malignant tumours have formed are illuminated.

Studies have shown that mammograms may miss 10 per cent to 20 per cent of breast cancers, especially if tumours are hidden in dense tissue.

About half of women under the age of 50, and a third of older women, have naturally dense breasts. In these cases, it is often difficult to tell if a lump of tissue is benign or malignant.

The new technique relies on the fact that malignant breast tumours contain high levels of a particular calcium salt called hydroxyapatite. In benign tumours, a different salt, calcium oxalate, predominates.

The scan is able to highlight hydroxyapatite, while ignoring calcium oxalate.

'By homing in on hydroxyapatite, we can target these malignant cells, and that has the potential to improve the patient's outcome,' said Dr John Frangioni, from Harvard Medical School in the U.S. He has conducted laboratory studies showing that the technique works well on animals similar in size to humans.

Future work will focus on preparing tests for human patients, which could take a 'few years'.

ABOUT one third of women with breast cancer who are being treated with Tamoxifen stop taking their medication early, according to a new study.

This is a concern because 'the maximum benefit from Tamoxifen is gained when it is taken for five years,' says Dr Thomas I. Barron of Trinity College Dublin, who led the research.

About 75 per cent of women diagnosed with breast cancer are prescribed a hormonal drug, such as Tamoxifen, primarily to reduce the risk of the cancer returning.

Dr Barron and colleagues studied 2,816 women's repeat prescriptions and found that 22per cent had stopped taking the drug one year after starting it, and 28 per cent after two years.

By 3.5 YEARS, 35 per cent had stopped taking Tamoxifen, without switching to an alternative drug. 'Younger women (35 to 45) and older women (75 plus) were more likely to stop their Tamoxifen,' Barron says.

'Also, women who had been prescribed antidepressants in the past ? an indicator that they may have a history of depression ? were more likely to stop treatment.

'Women discontinuing their Tamoxifen early may not receive the full benefits as these are closely related to the length of time it is taken,' says Barron.

'The benefits of five years of Tamoxifen have now been shown to extend for at least 15 years after a diagnosis of breast cancer.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

