TITLE	Aspirin could stave off cancer and help victims to survive

by FIONA MACRAE

Last updated at 00:07 17 April 2007

An aspirin a day could keep cancer at bay

A regular dose of aspirin could keep cancer at bay and boosts survival rates for those who contract the disease, new research has revealed.

A new study suggests that those who take the cheap and popular painkiller are 16 per cent less likely to develop cancer that those who do not.

Aspirin users were also 13 per cent less likely to die of the disease.

The startling research adds to the evidence that aspirin, a medicine cabinet staple for millions of families, could be a powerful weapon in the fight against the disease which claims more than 150,000 lives a year in the UK alone.

The detailed study - which analysed more than 22,000 women - follows a host of other reports which have shown that the drug, which costs as little as 1p per pill and is already widely used to prevent heart attacks and strokes, may also be able to stave off cancer.

The risk of breast, ovarian, prostate and lung cancer are all slashed by taking aspirin several times a week, while a common skin cancer is 90 per cent less likely among regular aspirin users.

However it is not exactly clear how the drug - the most widely-used medicine in the world - prevents cancer.

Scroll down for more... 

One of the ways it eases pain is by dampening down inflammation - a symptom thought to trigger and fuel many cancers.

While most previous studies have focused on the role of aspirin in preventing individual cancers, the latest research, presented yesterday at the American Association for Cancer Research's annual conference, looked at its ability to stave off the disease as a whole.

It tracked the health of 22,500 post-menopausal women for 12 years. Overall, those who regularly took aspirin for complaints such as heart problems and arthritis, were 16 per cent less likely to develop cancer and 13 per cent less likely to die from it.

Aspirin's cancer-fighting qualities were, however, cancelled out by smoking, with smokers who regularly took aspirin not being protected against the illness.

The research, carried out the respected Mayo Clinic, in Minnesota, also confirmed aspirin's ability to boost heart health.

It showed that the drug, already taken daily by millions of Britons to prevent heart attacks and stokes, reduced the risk of developing heart attacks and strokes.

However, other popular painkillers, such as ibuprofen, which work in a similar way to aspirin were not found to affect the risk of developing cancer or heart disease.

Researcher Dr Aditya Bardia said: "This is just one study. However, it does provide provocative evidence that regular aspirin use may play a role in preventing the common chronic diseases in western countries, namely cancer and heart disease."

Heart disease claims 233,000 lives year in the UK, while more than half of the 277,000 Britons diagnosed with cancer each year will die from the disease.

Previous studies have shown that regularly taking aspirin cuts the risk of squamous cell carcinoma - a common skin cancer - by up to 90 per cent.

An aspirin a day can also cut the likelihood of developing breast cancer by almost a third and the reduce the risk of ovarian cancer by almost 40 per cent.

It has also been shown to cut the risk of prostate cancer by 20 per cent and more than half the chances of developing the most common form of lung cancer.

The various studies did not settle on an optimum dosage for preventing cancer, with some volunteers taking a tablet a day, while others took the drug just twice a week.

More than two million heart attack and stroke survivors already take the drug, which thins the blood and prevents harmful blood clots from forming, daily in low doses to prevent further illness.

However, in 2005, British doctors called for all over-50s to take a daily dose of the drug.

Heart expert Professor Peter Elwood, of Cardiff University, said doing so could save tens of thousands of lives a year.

Despite its benefits, aspirin is not well-tolerated by all, with side-effects including nausea, heartburn, stomach pain, internal bleeding and haemorrhagic strokes, where blood vessels in the brain burst.

It may also raise the risk of pancreatic cancer, one of the most lethal of all cancers.

The latest research has been welcomed by British experts.

Nick Henderson, of the Aspirin Foundation said: "What is clear from the accumulating evidence is that regular use of aspirin really does seem to reduce the risk of a growing range of the commonest and most serious cancers.

"What dose of aspirin to use, how frequently to use it and even exactly how it works are still unknown but more work is being done to clarify these issues.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

