TITLE	'Older mothers should breastfeed to cut risk of cancer'

Last updated at 22:00 16 April 2007

Older mothers should breastfeed to cut their risk of developing breast cancer, doctors said last night.

A study has confirmed that women who give birth late in life are at greater risk of breast cancer than those who have their children while in their teens and early 20s.

However, the decision to breast-feed cancels out the risks associated with putting off motherhood.

Researcher Dr Giske Ursin told a conference: 'Breastfeeding may have a protective effect that negates the increased risk of breast cancer associated with late pregnancies.

'As more women may choose to delay pregnancy until after 25, it is important to note that breastfeeding provides protection against tumours.'

The finding comes as more and more British women put off motherhood.

Three quarters of the 646,000 babies born in England and Wales in 2005 - the latest year for which data are available - were born to women aged 25 and over.

Pregnancy and breastfeeding are thought to lead to changes in the breast tissue which protect against breast cancer. Falling pregnant for the first time early in life has been shown to be particularly protective.

Today's trend towards smaller families, late motherhood and bottle-feeding means women have less natural protection against the cancer which kills more than 1,000 British women a month.

Dr Ursin, of the University of Southern California, told the the American Association for Cancer Research's annual conference: 'Evidence suggests that women who have children after the age of 25 can reduce their risk of breast cancer by choosing to breastfeed.'

Dr Sarah Cant, of British charity Breakthrough Breast Cancer, said that while breastfeeding may have a protective effect, women of all ages should remain vigilant.

She said: 'It is important to remember that for most women their biggest breast cancer risk factor is increasing age, which is why all women should be breast aware and attend their screening appointments when invited.'

Breastfeeding has also been shown lower the risk of ovarian cancer and cut the risk of heart attacks by almost a quarter. Breast milk also boosts the baby's health, protecting them from tummy bugs, asthma, chest infections, asthma and allergies.

Studies have also suggested breastfed babies grow up to be happier and get better jobs when they grow up.

The Department of Health recommends that mothers should feed their babies breast milk alone for least six months to ensure they get the best start in life.

Despite this, the UK has one of the lowest rates in Europe, with just two-thirds of new mothers attempting it, compared with 98 per cent in Sweden.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

