TITLE	Two cuppas a day can 'slash skin cancer risk'

Last updated at 09:41 19 April 2007

Two cups of a tea day may slash the risk of skin cancer, according to new research.

Scientists found tea-drinkers were at least 65 per cent less likely to get certain types of tumour.

The biggest benefits were seen among long-term drinkers, especially those who downed several cups a day for more than 40 years.

The findings, published in the European Journal of Cancer Prevention, show tea's disease-fighting properties appear to protect the body against squamous cell carcinomas and basal cell carcinomas.

These types of tumours are not as dangerous as malignant melanomas, which have a high mortality rate, but do affect nearly 70,000 people in Britain every year.

They are usually caused by too much exposure to the sun's rays and grow slowly over a period of months or even years.

Squamous cell carcinomas normally appear on the face and turn into an ulcer-like growth that doesn't heal.

Basal cell carcinomas normally show up as a painless lump that gradually expands in size. Although they do not normally spread through the body, they still need be removed through surgery.

Britain's favourite hot drink is packed with powerful disease-fighting chemicals and its ability to ward off illness is well known.

Previous studies have found it can protect against heart disease, ovarian cancer and stress.

In the latest study, carried out at Dartmouth Medical School in New Hampshire, US, scientists analysed over 1,400 patients aged between 25 and 74 with one of the two types of tumour.

They compared their diet, drinking habits and lifestyle with a similar group who did not have cancer.

The results showed regular tea drinkers were 65 per cent less likely to have squamous cell carcinoma and almost 80 per less at risk of a basal cell carcinoma.

Dr Judy Rees, who led the research, said: "The constituents of tea have been investigated for their activity against a variety of diseases and cancers. But the most potent appear to be polyphenols."

These are antioxidants that block the damaging effects in the body of molecules known as free radicals.

But she stressed more research is needed to confirm it is the tea, not some other lifestyle factor, which is protecting against the illness.

The study was carried out in the US, where more people drink lemon tea than in the UK. Previous studies have suggested it may be the lemon which actually protects the skin.

Dr Alison Ross, from Cancer Research UK said the results were interesting but "did not provide firm evidence" that tea protects against skin cancer.

She said limiting exposure to the sun's rays was still the best way to reduce the risk.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

