TITLE	70 women 'die each year from cancer after taking HRT'

Last updated at 11:13 24 April 2007

More than 1,000 women may have died from ovarian cancer in the last 15 years due to taking Hormone Replacement Therapy, British researchers have claimed.

A study in the The Lancet medical journal published today claims around 70 deaths a year could be linked to the drug taken by menopausal women.

The findings will create further confusion among women reeling from a succession of claims and counter-claims regarding the safety of the treatment.

Only last week there was a major U-turn by US researchers who published data showing women in their 50s on HRT were protected against heart attacks and dying prematurely.

Just four years ago they were arguing that HRT was more likely to put women at risk of heart problems.

The re-analysis of the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) study led to renewed confidence in the drugs to stave off menopausal symptoms.

But the UK-sponsored Million Women Study now suggests HRT resulted in 1,300 extra cases of ovarian cancer between 1991 and 2005. Of these women, 1,000 died of the disease.

The study shows a 20 per cent increase in risk of the disease in women who have taken HRT for at least five years, but says it does not persist if women give up HRT.

To put the findings in perspective, they mean that over a period of five years there is likely to be one extra case of ovarian cancer among every 2,500 women receiving hormone replacement therapy.

For every 3,300 women on HRT, there is estimated to be one additional death from ovarian cancer.

Professor Valerie Beral, director of Cancer Research UK's epidemiology unit at Oxford University, said 'The results of this study are worrying because they show that not only does HRT increase the risk of getting ovarian cancer, it also increases a woman's risk of dying of ovarian cancer.

"This study, along with our previous research, clearly demonstrates the cancer risks of taking HRT."

Ovarian cancer is the fourth most common female cancer in the UK. Each year about 6,700 women develop the disease and 4,600 die from it.

The Million Women Study, largely funded by Cancer Research UK, looked at responses to questionnaires from 948,576 postmenopausal women, and followed them for seven years.

Around a third of the women were on HRT, and a further fifth had received it in the past, and none had had cancer.

During the follow-up period a total of 2,273 women developed ovarian cancer and 1,591 died from it.

Statistics showed for every 1,000 women on HRT, 2.6 developed ovarian cancer over five years, compared with 2.2 per 1,000 women who did not use HRT.

Researchers calculated from the findings how many extra women exposed to HRT were likely to have suffered and died from ovarian cancer between 1991 and 2005.

But they admit there is no biological explanation for HRT slightly increasing the risk of ovarian cancer only after exposure for five years - which then falls away once the drugs are stopped.

HRT is used to combat symptoms of the menopause, including hot flushes, vaginal dryness and night sweats, with a range of drugs including tablets, implants and patches.

The two main types of HRT contain either the hormone oestrogen alone, or oestrogen combined with progestogen.

Fears about health risks began with the WHI study in 2002, fuelled by the Million Women Study a year later which linked HRT with breast cancer.

Safety concerns led to drug regulatory authorities in the UK and other countries issuing restrictions, including the advice to use it for the shortest time possible, which have continued to deter women from getting treatment even for osteoporosis.

GP data shows the number of British women on HRT halved from two to one million between 2002 and 2005.

The British Menopause Society said the Million Women Study had been widely criticised by the scientific community for the way it was carried out and analysed.

Dr John Stevenson, a member of the society's council and chairman of the Women's Health Concern charity, said 'The study grossly over-estimated the breast cancer risk and now we have findings from a five-year study that have to be extended to a 14-year time frame to make them more sensational.

"This is not science, and the findings themselves fly in the face of cancer biology.

"It does not add up. HRT must be saving a lot of women from other causes of mortality since the WHI study looked at 27,000 women and found no increase in the overall death rate.

"In fact, when HRT is taken by women in their 50s - the age group for whom it's intended - there is a significant reduction in the death rate."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

