TITLE	Women who give birth over the age of 30 double their risk of breast cancer

By FIONA MACRAE

Last updated at 22:00 20 April 2007

Women who put off having children until after the age of 30 are twice as likely to develop hereditary breast cancer, experts have warned.

A study of hundreds of English women with a family history of breast cancer showed that those who gave birth earlier were half as likely to develop the disease as those who delayed motherhood.

The findings come as more and more British women delay having children.

Half of all births in the UK are to mothers over 30, compared with just over a quarter two decades ago.

Over-35s account for nine per cent of all births, more than twice the figure 20 years ago, while the pregnancy rate in women over 40 is rising faster than in any other age group.

Older mothers are already known to be at greater risk of problem pregnancies, miscarriages and stillbirth.

They also run a higher risk of having babies with Down's syndrome and other genetic disorders.

Now, it seems delaying motherhood also doubles the risk of developing hereditary breast cancer.

Five per cent of the 44,000 cases of breast cancer diagnosed in the UK each year are hereditary, mostly caused by flaws in a gene called BRCA1.

Those without the rogue gene have an 11 per cent chance of developing breast cancer in their lifetime, a risk that soars to 85 per cent for those with the gene.

The researchers behind the latest study advised women with a family history of the disease to think about having children while they were still young.

Professor Gareth Evans, of St Mary's and Christie hospitals in Manchester, said: "Women with a strong family history of breast cancer have often lost their mothers to the disease while still in childhood.

"The best option  to improve their own chances of being around for their children is to plan their family as early as possible.

"Not every woman is in a position when to decide to start a family but the study shows that those who are concerned with a risk of breast cancer within their family should not unduly delay falling pregnant if they can."

His study, carried out in conjunction with the University of Cambridge, looked at the rates of breast cancer and motherhood among 800 women across the North West and the Midlands.

All the women were considered to have a high risk of developing the disease because their relatives had done so.

Research found that the risk of breast cancer was almost halved for women who had given birth to their first child by the age of 30.

Scientists believe that crucial changes in breast tissue which can develop into cancer are stabilised by pregnancy between the ages of 14 and 30.

Professor Evans, an oncologist and consultant in medical genetics, said it wasn't completely clear why pregnancy can help stave off breast cancer.

"One theory is that pregnancy stabilises breast cells making them less likely to respond to female hormones such as progesterone and oestrogen which have been linked to the development of breast cancer," he said.

And it seems the earlier a woman starts her family the greater the protection. "It can take around ten years for early changes in breast tissue to develop into cancer and those early changes most commonly take place from the ages of 14 to 30," said the professor.

"However these changes in breast cells can be stabilised by pregnancy which is why the younger a woman has a baby the greater her protection from breast cancer."

While other studies have shown older mothers are at greater risk of breast cancer in general, the new research is the first to establish the link in women with a family history of the disease which claims more than 1,000 lives a month in the UK alone.

Lester Barr, a breast cancer specialist and chairman of breast cancer charity The Genesis Appeal, said there are various factors which define a woman as being at a hereditary risk of developing breast cancer.

They include having a mother or sister who developed the disease under the age of 50 or having more than one relative who has contracted it.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

