TITLE	Don't panic about HRT

by KAROL SIKORA

Last updated at 11:21 01 May 2007

About 18 months ago, my wife Alison, then 50, started the menopause.

She began to suffer terribly with its associated symptoms, experiencing hot flushes, night sweats, sleeplessness and a general overall discomfort.

Working as a practice nurse, Alison frequently advises women about taking Hormone Replacement Therapy (HRT) in order to deal with these unpleasant side-effects. With her informed view, she had no hesitation in starting the treatment herself.

As an oncologist with many years experience in clinical practice for cancer treatment, I fully endorsed her decision.

And I still do.

So we were both angered and deeply disturbed by the alarmist reports that women who take HRT are putting themselves at a massive risk of contracting ovarian cancer.

It seems that every week the newspapers are filled with negative reports about HRT, from one study or another, which put the fear of God into about HRT, from one study or which put the fear of God into women by suggesting that this is a dangerous and untested therapy which should be avoided at all costs.

Meanwhile, women who have used HRT are left to feel they have dug their own grave.

This latest study, based on a new piece of research known as the Million Women Study, suggests that HRT not only accelerates risk but has also resulted in an extra 1,000 deaths from the disease.

But in my opinion the interpretation of the research by the authors is deeply flawed, and the researchers have exaggerated their figures to suggest HRT is to blame.

As a result, their alarmist action will have triggered unnecessary panic among women who legitimately need to take HRT in order to cope with severe menopausal symptoms.

The dramatic headline- grabbing results came from a fiveyear study of the health of 948,576 post-menopausal women, looking at the rate of ovarian cancer among them. About a third were on HRT and another fifth had taken it in the past.

The results suggested that those who had used HRT increased their risk of developing and dying from ovarian cancer by 20 per cent.

But these results are clearly misleading. For a start, women's attitude to taking HRT and the advice they receive from their clinicians has altered radically since the beginning of the study.

In the early Nineties the view was that HRT should be taken for as long as a woman felt she needed it. As a result, many were on it for up to 15 years as the myth pervaded that HRT was the elixir of youth.

However, in recent years, perhaps as a response to studies and scare stories, women now tend to take HRT for much shorter periods of time. And this is where the new study is so misleading.

You see, it is likely that many of the deaths from ovarian cancer listed in the study occurred among women whose data was collected at the beginning of the research, when women's use of HRT was so very different.

I am not saying that HRT is risk-free - like any form of drug therapy, there is always the problem of side-effects. In the case of HRT the increased risk - of breast, ovarian and endometrial (womb) cancer - is thought to be around 20 per cent.

But that increased risk lasts only during the time a woman is on the treatment and for around two years after she finishes taking it.

After that, she reverts to the normal cancer risk of the general population. This is a key factor in the whole HRT debate, yet one which is rarely focused upon. And this is why a woman wanting to use HRT should not be unduly concerned.

What also dismays me is the way these results play into a woman's fears about ovarian cancer. This is the fourth most common cancer in women in Britain and quite rightly they live in fear of it, as it is difficult to diagnose and grows in a large volume before it manifests itself, by which time the statistics for survival are very poor.

That's why it has acquired the sinister tag of 'silent killer'.

But if there was such a strong link with HRT and ovarian cancer then surely the statistics among the general population would reflect this - when in fact the figures have remained fairly consistent.

For example, 3,934 women died from ovarian cancer in England and Wales in 1989, compared with 3,874 in 2005.

Considering the number of women taking HRT fell from two million to one million between 2002 and 2005, you'd think the rates of ovarian cancer would reflect that. But they don't.

There are so many other factors that can influence a woman's chances of developing hormonal cancers such as breast and ovarian, such as smoking, drinking or taking the Pill. But I fear these are being downplayed for the sake of sensationalism.

I have the deepest sympathy for women approaching the menopause. The ovarian cancer research is the latest in confusing and conflicting studies about the association between HRT and disease.

In terms of breast cancer, for example, some studies point to a significant risk while others suggest it is minimally protective.

Previously, women were told that HRT was more likely to put them at risk of heart problems.

Then last month, in a major U-turn, American researchers revealed that HRT protected women against heart attacks and dying prematurely. The fact is that cardiovascular disease (CVD), not cancer, is the biggest killer of women in the UK.

So where does all this leave women who are weathering deeply unpleasant side-effects from the menopause ?

There will doubtless always be a lingering suspicion about HRT - which is why drug regulatory authorities in the UK and other countries issue restrictions, including the advice to use it for the shortest time possible.

And to my mind that remains the best possible advice.

Women should take HRT, as long as they do so for as short a period as possible, say around two to three years ? using either combined HRT (oestrogen and progesterone), or oestrogen-only treatment.

There are alternatives such as acupuncture, but if these don't work there is no reason why a woman should not use a tested therapy which is known to combat symptoms of the menopause.

Since my wife has used HRT, the effects have been dramatic and the treatment has freed her from the awful symptoms of the menopause.

Alison intends to come off it soon (within three years of beginning HRT) and when she does it will be without regret for the way it has transformed her life.

We're both angered that other women may be too afraid to enjoy such a transformation.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

