TITLE	Growing evidence of power line dangers

Last updated at 20:21 27 April 2007

Evidence of a link between power lines and childhood leukaemia is growing and some scientists believe the cables can cause other cancers as well as raise the risk of miscarriage.

In 2002 a report from the California Department of Health Services concluded there was a possible connection between exposure to electromagnetic fields and higher risk of childhood leukaemia, adult brain cancer, motor neurone disease and miscarriage.

All three of the scientists who carried out the study said such fields could cause an increased risk of suicide, while one of them said it seemed to raise the risk of adult leukaemia.

The report said people exposed to magnetic fields in and around their homes experienced disruption of the nocturnal production of the anti-cancer hormone melatonin - increasing their risk.

The results were interpreted as meaning that one in 20 pregnant women exposed to strong electromagnetic fields could be at risk of miscarriage.

In 2005 a study by Oxford University's childhood cancer research group said children living within 220 yards of an overhead power line had a 70 per cent greater risk of falling victim to leukaemia.

For those living between 220 and 660 yards away, the risk is 20 per cent higher, according to the researchers who looked at the cases of more than 29,000 children with cancer between 1962 and 1995.

The report concluded: "There is an association between childhood leukaemia and proximity of home address at birth to high voltage power lines. The apparent risk extends to a greater distance than would have been expected from previous studies."

The report, part funded by National Grid owners Transco, concluded that around five of the 400 or so cases of leukaemia diagnosed each year in England and Wales could be linked to power lines.

Other scientists interpreting the same data said as many as 60 cases a year could be explained this way.

The study was unable to establish how magnetic fields could raise the risk of childhood cancer.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

