TITLE	Men can get cancer from HPV too: The facts on HPV

Last updated at 17:51 10 May 2007

Men can get cancer from HPV too, research has shown.

"Genital HPV virus" is a sexually transmitted disease (STD) that is caused by human papillomavirus (HPV).

Human papillomavirus is the name of a group of viruses that includes more than 100 different strains or types. More than 30 of these viruses are sexually transmitted, and they can infect the genital area of men and women.

Most people who become infected with HPV will not have any symptoms and will clear the infection on their own.

Some of these viruses, however, are called "high-risk" types, and may cause abnormal Pap tests. They may also lead to various cancers including, as new research has shown, of the throat.

At least 50 per cent of sexually active men and women acquire genital HPV infection at some point in their lives. By age 50, at least 80 per cent of women will have acquired genital HPV infection.

Most women are diagnosed with HPV on the basis of abnormal Pap tests. Also, a specific test is available to detect HPV DNA in women. The results of HPV DNA testing can help health care providers decide if further tests or treatment are necessary.

No HPV tests are currently available for men.

All types of HPV can cause mild Pap test abnormalities which do not have serious consequences. Approximately 10 of the 30 identified genital HPV types can lead, in rare cases, to development of cervical cancer. Research has shown that for most women (90 percent), cervical HPV infection becomes undetectable within two years. Although only a small proportion of women have persistent infection, persistent infection with "high-risk" types of HPV is the main risk factor for cervical cancer.

Regular Pap testing and careful medical follow-up, with treatment if necessary, can help ensure that pre-cancerous changes in the cervix caused by HPV infection do not develop into life threatening cervical cancer.

The surest way to eliminate risk for HPV infection is to refrain from any genital contact with another individual.

For those choosing to be sexually active and who are not in long-term mutually monogamous relationships, reducing the number of sexual partners and choosing a partner less likely to be infected may reduce the risk of genital HPV infection - such as those who have had no or few prior sex partners.

HPV infection can occur in both male and female genital areas that are covered or protected by a latex condom, as well as in areas that are not covered. Condom use has, however, been associated with a lower rate of cervical cancer, an HPV-associated disease.

The HPV vaccine is recommended for 11-12 year-old girls, and can be given to girls as young as 9. The vaccine is also recommended for 13-26 year-old girls/women who have not yet received or completed the vaccine series.

Ideally, females should get the vaccine before they are sexually active. This is because the vaccine is most effective in girls/women who have not yet acquired any of the four HPV types covered by the vaccine.

Females who are sexually active may also benefit from the vaccine. But they may get less benefit from the vaccine since they may have already acquired one or more HPV type(s) covered by the vaccine.

It is not yet known if the vaccine is effective in boys or men. It is possible that vaccinating males will have health benefits for them by preventing warts and rare cancers. It is also possible that vaccinating boys/men will have indirect health benefits for girls/women.

Studies are now being done to find out if the vaccine works to prevent HPV infection and disease in males. When more information is available, this vaccine may be licensed and recommended for boys/men as well.

The vaccine is not recommended for pregnant women.

Studies have found the vaccine to be almost 100 per cent effective in preventing diseases caused by the four HPV types covered by the vaccine.

However because the vaccine does not protect against all types of HPV, it will not prevent all cases of cervical cancer or warts.

About 30 per cent of cervical cancers will not be prevented by the vaccine, so it will be important for women to continue getting screened for cervical cancer (regular Pap tests).

Also, the vaccine does not prevent about 10 per cent of genital warts, nor will it prevent other sexually transmitted infections (STIs). So it will still be important for sexually active adults to reduce exposure to HPV and other STIs. Both men and women can get HPV ? and pass it on - without even realizing it.

Certain types of HPV have been linked to cancer in men. These cancers are rare ? especially in men with healthy immune systems.

Over half of sexually active men in the United States (U.S.) will have HPV at some time in their lives.

At the moment, there is no test approved to detect HPV in men. However, there are ways to detect the most common problem caused by HPV in men, genital warts.

There are currently no tests approved to detect early evidence of HPV-associated cancers in men, as there are for women (Pap tests).

There is no treatment or cure for HPV. But there are ways to treat the health conditions associated with HPV in men.

While most men will not develop health problems from HPV, some men are at higher risk of disease from HPV. It is also important for men to realize that they can unknowingly transmit HPV to their female sex partners.

Compared to heterosexual men, women are at higher risk of developing disease from HPV ? most notably, cervical cancer.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

