TITLE	Chemo-free cancer cure 'will save thousands'

by JENNY HOPE

Last updated at 15:56 13 September 2007

New drugs for breast cancer could save thousands of lives a year without the need for gruelling chemotherapy.

Trials have shown that hormone therapy drugs are at least as effective as chemotherapy in women under 40 - but with fewer side effects.

It means younger cancer patients could still be able to have children.

Experts believe up to 5,500 women each year who develop breast cancer before the menopause would benefit from drugs such as Zoladex, which is given once a month as an implant under the skin of the stomach.

The drugs work in cancers that are hormonesensitive, meaning they are stimulated by oestrogen. Around two-thirds of cancers in younger women are hormone-sensitive.

The latest British trials, reported today in The Lancet, also showed that the drugs can boost the effects of both chemotherapy or tamoxifen.

Such double treatment cut the recurrence of cancer by nearly 13 per cent and reduced the death rate by 15 per cent.

Kate Law, head of clinical trials at Cancer Research UK, said last night: 'Breast cancer is always a shocking diagnosis but it is particularly sad when its treatment results in women being unable to have children.

"This is a very encouraging finding and suggests treatment for some women could be less devastating, while being equally effective as conventional chemotherapy."

Drugs such as Zoladex, also known as goserelin, were originally developed to treat prostate cancer.

They have been used against breast cancer for some years, but experts say the latest study provides the most solid evidence yet that the regime can save women's fertility as well as their lives.

Made by AstraZeneca, Zoladex costs just &pound;84 a month.

Maria Leadbeater, Clinical Nurse Specialist at Breast Cancer Care, said: "These drugs have been licensed for many years, and there should be no barrier to women receiving them if there is a clinical need.

"This study gives us a better understanding of their effectiveness.

"These drugs are another treatment option for younger women with breast cancer and could help to even further reduce the risk of the disease returning when added to chemotherapy or drugs like tamoxifen.

"They can be offered on their own or as an alternative to techniques that permanently stop ovaries producing oestrogen, but this must be assessed on an individual basis.

"This would be particularly of interest to many of the younger women we support who are looking to conserve their fertility."

After surgery to remove tumours, drugs are used to reduce or switch off the body's supply of oestrogen, cutting the risk of the cancer coming back.

But while chemotherapy is effective at stopping the ovaries from producing oestrogen, it can cause permanent infertility and unpleasant side effects, including hair loss.

Hormone therapy drugs, called LHRH agonists, work by stopping the pituitary gland from producing a hormone which stimulates the ovaries to manufacture oestrogen.

Once treatment is ended, after about two years, the ovaries usually begin functioning normally again.

The new British study, which combined results from trials involving 12,000 women, found LHRH agonists used on their own to treat early breast cancer were as effective as chemotherapy.

The lead author of the study, Professor Jack Cuzick of Queen Mary, London University and Cancer Research UK, said: "These results point to an important additional approach to treating breast cancer.

"They mean pre-menopausal women could consider treatment that is as effective as chemotherapy without having to endure unpleasant side effects and risk losing their fertility."

About two-thirds of pre-menopausal patients have hormone-sensitive breast cancer - around 5,500 of the 42,000 women diagnosed with breast cancer every year in the UK.

The Government's 'rationing' watchdog, the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, is due to issue new treatment guidelines in January 2009 which are expected to confirm the effectiveness of the drugs for breast cancer.

Dr Rakesh Patel, medical leader at AstraZeneca, said: "Clinicians have recognised their value in treating early breast cancer but it's very encouraging to have an important study which shows the benefits are increasing all the time."

Dr Sarah Cant, senior policy and information officer at Breakthrough Breast Cancer said: "Women tell us that they like to have treatment choice and this could be another option for some younger women with hormone positive breast cancer.

"We encourage anyone wanting to find out more to speak to their doctor.

"We also look forward to further research into the effects of these drugs when combined with newer breast cancer treatments such as aromatase inhibitors."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

