TITLE	'Calcium and Vitamin D cut breast cancer risk by more than a third'

By JENNY HOPE

Last updated at 15:57 13 September 2007

Young women can cut their risk of breast cancer by more than a third by eating more calcium and vitamin D, claim researchers.

Foods rich in the nutrients - including milk, oily fish and green vegetables - could be the latest weapon in the fight against the disease.

A US study of more than 30,000 women found those eating high levels of calcium and vitamin D were up to 40 per cent less likely to develop breast cancer before the menopause.

The protection was "more pronounced" for aggressive tumours, says the study published in the Archives of Internal Medicine.

But the preventive effect was not found in women developing breast cancer after the menopause, which occurs around the age of 50.

In the UK about 8,000 women - one in five of the annual total diagnosed with the disease - get premenopausal breast cancer each year.

The latest study adds to increasing evidence that vitamin D may play an important role in preventing breast cancer - particularly when combined with calcium - and possibly other cancers.

Researchers led by Jennifer Hsiang-Ling Lin at Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, assessed the diets of more than 10,000 premenopausal and 21,000 postmenopausal women.

When the study started in the early 1990s, the women completed a questionnaire about their medical history and lifestyle and a food frequency questionnaire which detailed how often they consumed certain foods, beverages and supplements.

The women completed regular questionnaires over the following 10 years to say whether they had been diagnosed with breast cancer.

Altogether 276 premenopausal women and 743 postmenopausal women developed the disease.

Among premenopausal women, those in the group with highest intake of calcium - more than 1,300 milligrams a day - had a 40 per cent lower risk of disease.

Those in the group with highest vitamin D intake - around 550 international units (IU) a day - had a 35 per cent lower risk compared with women eating the least amount of the nutrient.

The link was found to be strongest for faster growing tumours - which tend to be more often diagnosed in younger women.

"The likely apparent protection in premenopausal women may be more pronounced for more aggressive breast tumours" says the study.

It did not find any change in risk conferred by eating the nutrients in women after the menopause.

The study included food and supplements as sources of calcium and vitamin D, but did not look at sun exposure.

Vitamin D is found in salmon, tuna and other oily fish, and is routinely added to milk, but diet accounts for very little of the nutrient that actually makes it into the bloodstream, with most coming from sun exposure.

In the UK, the Food Standards Agency does not recommend a specific daily dose unless you are elderly, pregnant, Asian, get little sun exposure and eat no meat or oily fish when 10micrograms (or the US equivalent of 400IU) is advised.

It says daily supplements of 25 mcg are unlikely to cause harm. Good sources of calcium include milk, yoghurt, green vegetables, wholemeal bread and nuts.

British adults are recommended to consume at least 700mg a day - half the level advised in the US.

Dr Hsiang-Ling Lin said interaction between the nutrients appears to have an anti-carcinogenic effect on breast cancer cells.

She said: "Our findings suggest that premenopausal women consuming higher levels of calcium and vitamin D had a lower risk of breast cancer compared with those who had low intakes of both nutrients.

"I would recommend women, especially premenopausal women, have adequate intakes of calcium and vitamin D to keep up their overall health, and additionally, to potentially reduce risk for developing breast cancer."

Breast cancer charities in the UK last night called for more research.

Helen Graham, Breast Health Specialist at Breast Cancer Care said "It has been suggested before that Vitamin D and Calcium may help to protect against breast cancer.

"However, whilst this is an interesting piece of research it does not offer any further insight or explanation into exactly how they may do this.

 "More research is needed, especially those that specifically examine the potential role of Vitamin D and Calcium may play in the development of breast cancer."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

