TITLE	Exercise plus good food can halve breast cancer deaths

By DANIEL MARTIN

Last updated at 15:57 13 September 2007

Eating healthily and taking regular exercise can slash a breast cancer victim's risk of dying, according to scientists.

They found that walking briskly for half an hour and eating five portions of fruit and vegetables a day halved the chances of dying from the disease, even if a woman was obese.

In the first study to look at the impact of both diet and physical activity on breast cancer survival, a team from the University of California at San Diego studied 1,490 women with an average age of 50.

The women, who had all undergone primary therapy for early-stage breast cancer, were taking part in the Women's Healthy Eating and Living study, looking at the effects of lifestyle on health.

The researchers found that women who were both physically active and had a healthy diet were much more likely to survive for between five and 11 years than the rest of the group.

Only around 7 per cent of the 'healthyliving' women died within 11 years - about half that seen for the others taking part in the study.

Dr John Pierce, from the university's Moores Cancer Centre, said: "We demonstrate in this study of breast cancer survivors that even if a woman is overweight, if she eats at least five servings of vegetables and fruits a day and walks briskly for 30 minutes, six days a week, her risk of death from her disease goes down by 50 per cent. The key is that you must do both."

The findings are published in the latest issue of the Journal of Clinical Oncology.

Because of the strength of the findings, the scientists now want to see if taking steps to change diet and physical activity affects breast cancer survival.

They suggest that a healthy lifestyle should be routinely prescribed as part of breast cancer treatment.

The findings were welcomed by cancer charities yesterday.

Dr Sarah Cant of Breakthrough Breast Cancer said: "This initial study is encouraging - breast cancer patients tell us that they would like more information about beneficial lifestyle changes can make, and we look forward to further research in this

"We also know that regular exercise helps to reduce the risk of developing breast cancer, so Breakthrough Breast Cancer encourages all women to lead a healthy lifestyle, which includes taking regular exercise and eating a balanced diet."

Liz Caroll, head of clinical services at Breast Cancer Care, said: "More and more evidence is emerging clearly pointing to the potential benefits exercise and a healthy diet may have in improving breast cancer survival rates.

"It is important to stress that regular exercise and a healthy diet are always beneficial in maintaining good health."

Henry Scowcroft of Cancer Research UK, said: "The results of this study add to mounting evidence that adopting a healthy lifestyle might also play a role in cancer survival, as well as helping to prevent the disease.

"It is really interesting that the effects observed in this study only occurred when the women both exercised and ate healthily.

"We still need to find out more about exactly how lifestyle changes can influence breast cancer survival.

"What we do know is that maintaining a healthy bodyweight, eating sensibly and taking regular exercise is the key to a healthy life, as it can help reduce your risk of several types of cancer, as well as many other diseases."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

