TITLE	Why we're giving our daughters the cervical cancer jab

By DIANA APPLEYARD

Last updated at 12:55 23 June 2007

When Lisa Anderson asked her 13-year-old daughter, Hollie, if she would like to be vaccinated against cervical cancer, she readily agreed. "She's been talking to all her friends at school about it," says the 44-year-old child psychologist from Enfield in North London. "She's very proud to be the first girl in the country to have the vaccination."

The drug she received at a private clinic in London last year was Gardasil, which offers protection against the sexually-transmitted human papilloma virus (HPV) - a trigger for cervical cancer

But while Hollie may be something of a novelty among her classmates, the Government's announcement this week that it has given the go-ahead for a &pound;100million Gardasil school vaccination programme looks set to change all that.

Across Britain, schoolgirls as young as 12 will be given a triple injection in a bid to stem rates of the second most common cancer in younger women after breast cancer.

Each year, more than 3,000 cases are diagnosed in the UK, mostly in women aged 15 to 44, leading to 1,100 deaths annually. But so far the drug is available only privately at a cost of &pound;450 for the three injections.

Not surprisingly, however, the Government's plan to proceed with a nationwide vaccination

programme has sparked a fierce moral debate, not least because of the uncomfortable link between cervical cancer and sexual behaviour.

The risk of getting an HPV infection - which only occasionally causes cervical cancer - increases with the number of sexual partners.

Now, some mothers are leaping at the chance to have their daughters vaccinated as a guarantee against them succumbing to this disease later in life. Others are understandably expressing grave concerns that the vaccination will be seen by young girls - already able to buy the morning-after pill over the counter at chemists - as yet another green light on the road to promiscuity.

Scientists may argue that the vaccine will be the first to prevent thousands of deaths from a specific cancer, but campaigners fear that having been vaccinated, young teenagers will be lulled into a false sense of security, believing that they will be immune from the consequences of unsafe sex.

The vaccine does not, of course, protect against pregnancy or sexually-transmitted diseases such as chlamydia, syphilis, gonorrhea or HIV.

Lisa Anderson insists she had no qualms about deciding to give her daughter Hollie the vaccine. "I firmly believe that every mother should arrange for their child to have this vaccination," she says. "I see it as the most responsible thing for a parent to do.

"I know there has been a lot of controversy over the sexual side of things, but I do not think that should put mothers off.

"It is something I have talked to Hollie about at length. We don't hide anything from each other and I know she would never see this as a way of avoiding a sexually-transmitted disease, or encourage her in any way to have under-age sex.

"Hollie did her own research on the internet, which strengthened her resolve to have the course of injections. Her actual words were: 'It's better to be safe than sorry.'"

Lisa's strong views on the vaccine might be explained by the fact that her own mother, Shirley, now aged 67, is a survivor of cervical cancer.

"My mother had to battle against this disease, and it was a dreadful time for the whole family. If I can protect my daughter, why shouldn't I? We've been lucky in that after having a course of radiotherapy my mother has been given the all-clear, but it's been a shock for all of us."

But other parents may not be so sure. Like all vaccination programmes, the Gardasil scheme will be voluntary and parents will be able to opt out.

The problem is that because the issues surrounding the vaccine are so controversial, many parents will inevitably find themselves unable to agree on whether to allow their daughters to have it or not.

Sarah and Paul Dean from Sidcup in Kent are at loggerheads over Sarah's belief that their nine-year-old daughter, Freya, should be vaccinated.

"I felt really uncomfortable - angry, even - at what Sarah was suggesting," admits Paul, a former builder. "I thought it was raising the whole issue of sex far too early, even pushing her towards sexual activity.

"It's so hard to bring up children these days and keep them as kids. Every day I feel as if we are fighting against the rest of the world to retain the innocence in Freya's life.

"Everything is sexualised - the magazines they read, the TV they watch."

On the other hand Sarah, a former nurse, passionately believes in the vaccine.

"I said: 'Paul, do you want our daughter to die before us, from something that we could have prevented? If you keep refusing to address this issue because you feel uncomfortable about sex, that is what could happen.'

"Idealism is lovely. I can sit here and tell you that I'd like Freya to wait to have sex until she is 17 or 18, but I don't think that's realistic.

"We can do everything we can to teach her that sex isn't something to be taken casually - and believe me we do - but with the best will in the world, no parent can control that."

Sarah Clarke, a 59-year-old mother from Bolton in Lancashire who was diagnosed and treated for the early stages of cervical cancer when she was 35, paid for her 17-year-old daughter to have the vaccination last October.

"I was very lucky that it was caught so early with me, and I haven't had any health problems since. So that made me determined to protect Rebecca," she explains.

"I see this as a realistic way of protecting her from harm. She is not yet in a serious relationship, and so I thought it was the most responsible thing to do to arrange for her to have these vaccinations.

"Who knows if in the height of passion all those sensible thoughts about safe sex will go out of the window, but at least I know she will be protected against HPV, which alarmingly seems to be more and more common.

"I trust Rebecca not to put herself at risk, but there is so much pressure on young girls now that you have to take advantage of every health benefit you can. She's a bright girl who aims to read medicine at university, and I know that she would not willingly put herself at risk.

"We have full and frank discussions about sex, and she agreed that if this vaccination was available, it made sense to have it. It is most effective before a girl is sexually active, so it makes sense to have it done now."

The decision to have the vaccine was, she says, a joint one.

"At 17, Rebecca knows her own mind and I would not have gone ahead without her permission. I see it as a precautionary measure, not something which will encourage her to be promiscuous."

But some family groups do not agree.

Stephen Green of Christian Voice said the message being sent out to young girls by the vaccination programme would be "one of despair, disrespect and low expectations".

"The best way of not getting cervical cancer," he insists, "is to stay a virgin. I expect school health outreach workers from primary care trusts and the like will be giving Gardasil to girls behind their parents' backs.

"Since the vaccine works best before the onset of sexual activity, they will be treating these girls, to put in bluntly, like tarts, saying that they are sexually incontinent and lacking in self-respect."

But many mothers say that not only do they have faith in their daughters' ability to take care of themselves, it also makes sense to take precautions.

When 47-year-old Monica Moezinia, a housewife who has three daughters and is married to Henri, 50, a property developer, heard about the vaccine, she immediately made an appointment at a private clinic for her youngest two.

The eldest, 20-year-old Yasmine, is away at university in America, but Nadine, 18, and 16-year-old Carine, who still live at home in Kensington, West London, have both had the vaccine.

"Cervical cancer is a killer disease, and whatever we as parents can do to protect our children surely makes sense," she says.

"As I understand it, the younger they have the injection the better, before they are sexually active. That is obviously not an area I dwelt on too deeply with my daughters, but they put their trust in me to protect them.

"We did have a discussion about why this vaccination is so important, and they agreed we should go ahead. It is not cheap but, to me, that is irrelevant compared to the health benefits."

Bella Watson, 48, who lives in Wilmslow in Cheshire with her financial adviser husband Thomas, 50, has also paid for her 16-year-old daughter Rachel to have the vaccination at the Fleet Street Clinic in London.

She explains: "I wanted to have Rachel vaccinated before she is sexually active and at 16, Rachel and I can have a perfectly frank discussion about why it is so important.

"To me, it is simply a matter of living in the real world and doing the best you can for your children. It is a health issue, rather than a social one. I really do not believe this is going to make any young girl more sexually active.

"It is simply going to protect Rachel from what is a very dangerous disease - there are no more connotations to it than that.

"22I have a history of breast cancer in our family, both in the case of my mother and my husband's mother. I have a mammogram privately every two years, and I believe that if there is anything you can do to prevent cancer, then it should be seized.

"My daughter says she has total faith in me, and that if I feel it is important, then she is happy to have it done. She knows the family background of cancer and agrees that it makes sense to be safe rather than sorry.

"I think that all you can do as a parent is talk to them openly, make them feel secure and loved, and trust them to make the right decisions in life. You cannot protect them from every outside influence."

Until the scheme is introduced, probably in September 2008, other parents in Britain still have time to make up their own minds.

Jane Hackett, a 28-year-old single mother, who works in PR, from Witley in Surrey, is considering having her 11-year-old daughter vaccinated. "Surely it makes sense to take advantage of something which can protect your child?" she argues.

"I know a lot of people are upset by the implications that this may promote teenage sex, but I think you have to be realistic. No, I don't think it will encourage Clover to have sex at 13 or 14, but it will become an issue quite possibly a few years later on from this when she is a little older, and if there is a vaccination which will protect her then I think it is entirely sensible to take advantage of it. You have to accept how society is today."

So is that sentiment simple realism - or defeatism?

No one would condemn a drug that promises to save so many lives, but, for some, the enthusiastic welcoming of Gardasil leaves an uneasy suspicion that in modern Britain - Europe's teen pregnancy capital - we have accepted that promiscuity is on the rise along with incidents of sexually-transmitted diseases, and have given up trying to do anything to prevent it.

Whether or not the average 12-year-old girl will understand the implications of the vaccine is uncertain. It is depressing that they should have to do so.

But certainly this week, future generations of young girls appear to have been pushed one step closer to adulthood.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

