TITLE	Yo-yo dieting 'can increase the risk of kidney cancer'

By DANIEL MARTIN and BOB OSMAN

Last updated at 08:52 17 July 2007

Women have been warned that yo-yo dieting can more than double the risk of developing kidney cancer.

Scientists have found that women who repeatedly lose weight only to put it back on are at a significantly higher risk of the disease later in life.

Experts have known for years that smoking and obesity are two of the main risk factors for kidney cancer.

But the latest research suggests that "weight cycling" - as typified by the fluctuating shape of Geri Halliwell - may exert an even bigger influence on the disease than body size.

Each year 6,700 people in Britain are diagnosed with kidney cancer, most over 65 and more men than women. It is the UK's 13th most common cause of cancer and is notoriously difficult to treat.

Swedish and American scientists studied 140,057 women aged between 50 and 79 for almost eight years, and found that yo-yo dieting and a large waistline were far bigger risk factors in the development of the disease in older women than just obesity.

Women whose weight fluctuated by more than 4.5kg (10lb) on more than ten occasions during their adult life were two and a half times more likely to develop kidney cancer than women whose weight had remained stable.

The researchers also found it was safer for women to gain weight steadily as they grew older than to lose weight and keep it that way through strict dieting.

Women who did this were found to have a 60 per cent increased risk of developing the cancer.

Obesity was an important factor in kidney disease risk. The scientists report in the American Journal of Epidemiology that when they measured waistline as a proportion of hip size, they found the greater the ratio between waist and hips, the more chance a woman had of getting the disease.

When compared to average waist size, those with the largest waist to hip ratios were found to have an 80 per cent increased risk of developing a type of kidney cancer known as renal cell carcinoma (RCC).

In the study, the authors say there could be several explanations to why repeated weight changes and large waistlines are such risk factors for women.

They point out that studies have shown that weight cycling is associated with increased incidence of high blood pressure, another risk factor for RCC.

Another possibility is that frequent weight fluctuations may result in kidney damage by inducing metabolic or functional changes that increase susceptibility to cancer.

Dr Colin Waine of the National Obesity Forum said: "When we think of obesity we tend to think of the risks of diabetes and heart disease but the risks are not inconsiderable for certain cancers.

"The most prominent ones are post-menopausal breast cancer and colonic cancer, but others such as pancreatic, kidney and oesophageal cancer are affected too.

"Yo-yo dieting is never a healthy thing to do because the body never gets a chance to settle. It knocks the metabolism all to hell, which is bad for you in many ways."

Earlier this year, the world's largest study of weight loss concluded that diets are damaging for most slimmers because of the tendency to regain the weight.

More than two-thirds pile the pounds straight back on, raising the danger of heart attack, stroke and diabetes, said University of California researchers.

IT'S GERI HALLIWELL, MORE OR LESS

Scroll down for more

Dressed in jeans and a cropped shirt, Geri Halliwell looked trim and healthy on her arrival at Heathrow Airport yesterday afternoon.

However, the former Spice Girl's weight has fluctuated alarmingly over the years.

In the mid-1990s, Miss Halliwell was known as the curviest in the group.

But her weight plummeted from 8st 7lb to 7st after she left the band in 2000, causing some friends to fear for her health.

Three years later the singer's curvy figure was back, although her precise weight appeared to vary from month to month.

She looked healthy and glowing while pregnant with daughter Bluebell Madonna last year, and lost her baby weight weeks after giving birth.

Now aged 34, Miss Halliwell seems to have settled - at least for the time being - for a slim and trim shape.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

