TITLE	Large glass of wine a day increases bowel cancer risk by 10 per cent

Last updated at 15:44 30 July 2007

Drinking a large glass of wine or a pint of beer a day increases the risk of developing bowel cancer by around 10 per cent, a report out today said.

And drinking around two pints a day or around two large glasses of wine increases the risk by 25 per cent, a study found.

Around 35,000 new cases of bowel cancer are diagnosed in the UK each year, and almost 16,100 people die from it.

The lifetime risk for bowel cancer is one in 20 for men and one in 18 for women.

Almost 480,000 people across 10 European countries were questioned about their drinking habits as part of the ongoing European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) study.

That research is funded by Cancer Research UK, the Medical Research Council and other European agencies.

The findings on bowel cancer, published online in the International Journal of Cancer, found that people who drank 15 grams of alcohol a day - equivalent to about two units - had around a 10 per cent increased risk of bowel cancer.

Those who drank more than 30 grams of alcohol - equivalent to three to four units - increased their bowel cancer risk by around 25 per cent.

In the UK, one unit equates to eight grams of pure alcohol.

But the number of units a drink contains depends on how strong it is and how large the measure.

All the participants in the study were followed up for a period of six years. During that period, 1,833 people developed bowel cancer.

Professor Tim Key, Cancer Research UK epidemiologist and deputy director of the cancer epidemiology unit in Oxford, said: "The research shows quite clearly that the more alcohol you drink the greater your risk of bowel cancer.

"The increase in risk is not large but it is important that people understand they can reduce their risk of a number of different cancers - including bowel cancer - by cutting down on alcohol."

Dr Lesley Walker, Cancer Research UK's director of cancer information, said: "There is a lot of confusion over safe levels of drinking.

"This partly arises over the increasing strength of some wines and beers and the fact that many pubs offer a large glass of wine that is actually equivalent to one third of a bottle.

"It is important that people do not automatically equate one drink with one unit.

"A large glass of wine with a high alcohol volume is likely to be the equivalent of considerably more than that.

"Cancer Research UK recommends that women should drink less than two units a day and men less than three.

"While there is increasing evidence that over indulging in alcohol can increase the risk of some cancers, research also shows that by far the biggest risk for life threatening diseases is the combination of smoking together with drinking alcohol."

The Government recommends that men drink no more than three to four units of alcohol per day and women drink no more than two to three.

Pregnant women and those trying to conceive are told to avoid drinking altogether.

Last month, Government figures revealed there were more than eight million problem drinkers in England.

The data from the Department of Health showed 7.1 million "hazardous and harmful drinkers" cost the health service &pound;1.3 billion a year.

The figures also revealed there were 1.1 million "dependent drinkers", who cost the health economy &pound;403 million. In the same month, a Trading Standards Institute survey of 12,000 youngsters found that thousands of teenagers binge-drink at least once a week.

It warned that teenage pupils are knocking back five or more units at a time.

Just over half (51 per cent) of the regular "binge drinkers" said they had been violent when drinking.

And nearly half (44 per cent) of the 14 to 17-year-old pupils surveyed drank alcohol at least once a week.

Last month, the Government was accused of failing to tackle binge-drinking after a study found the number of A and E visits related to alcohol trebled after the introduction of 24-hour drinking laws.

Researchers from a London hospital discovered that the alcohol-related visits to A and E during the night increased hugely after the laws were introduced in November 2005.

The authors said their findings were likely to represent the picture at other inner city hospitals across the UK and warned of the possibility of "very substantial" numbers of additional patients over time.

The Department of Health said other, more comprehensive, research had found no rise in A and E attendances.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

