TITLE	Bowel cancer danger of just one glass of wine per day

By FIONA MACRAE

Last updated at 22:00 30 July 2007

As little as one glass of wine or a pint of beer each day raises the risk of bowel cancer, doctors have warned.

Their study, of almost half a million people, highlighted a clear link between alcohol and the cancer which claims 16,000 lives a year in the UK alone.

It showed that two units - equivalent to a large glass of wine or a pint of beer - is enough to raise the risk of developing the disease by 10 per cent.

And the more you drink, the greater the threat. Two pints a day, or two large glasses of wine, increases the risk by a quarter.

The researchers did not look at whether drinking more than four units of alcohol increased the risk even further.

Writing in the International Journal of Cancer, they said it is not the alcohol itself that causes cancer but the damage caused by chemicals produced when alcohol breaks down in the gut.

Bowel cancer, which is surpassed in deadliness only by lung cancer, affects around 35,000 Britons each year, with a new case diagnosed every 15 minutes.

Men have a one in 20 chance of developing it in their lifetime, while for women the risk is slightly higher at one in 18.

The researchers, from across Europe, studied the health and drinking habits of 480,000 people from ten countries, including the UK. Six years after the start of the study, more than 1,800 of the volunteers had developed bowel cancer.

Professor Tim Key, of the Cancer Research UK epidemiology unit at Oxford University, said: "The research shows quite clearly that the more alcohol you drink the greater your risk of bowel cancer.

"The increase in risk is not large but it is important that people understand they can reduce their risk of a number of different cancers - including bowel cancer - by cutting down on alcohol."

Other conditions linked to alcohol include mouth cancer and breast cancer. Small amounts of alcohol, however, appear to keep heart disease at bay.

A recent study found that half a glass of wine a day is so beneficial to the heart that it extends life expectancy by almost four years.

Dr Lesley Walker, Cancer Research UK's director of cancer information, said everyone should stop and think about how much they drink.

"There is a lot of confusion over safe levels of drinking. This partly arises over the increasing strength of some wines and beers and the fact that many pubs offer a large glass of wine that is actually equivalent to one third of a bottle.

"It is important that people do not automatically equate one drink with one unit.

"A large glass of wine with a high alcohol volume is likely to be the equivalent of considerably more than that.

"Cancer Research UK recommends that women should drink less than two units a day and men less than three.

"While there is increasing evidence that over-indulging in alcohol can increase the risk of some cancers, research also shows that by far the biggest risk for life-threatening diseases is the combination of smoking with drinking alcohol."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

