TITLE	MRI scans 'beat mammograms in detecting breast cancer'

By JENNY HOPE

Last updated at 15:58 13 September 2007

MRI scanning is far better at detecting an 'early' form of breast cancer than conventional X-rays, researchers have claimed. They are calling for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to be taken more seriously as a method of identifying early-stage breast cancer.

At present, MRI scans, which produce images using magnetic fields and radio waves, are rarely used in breast clinics. They provide a backup to conventional mammography used in screening programmes.

But the new study of more than 7,300 women found 92 per cent of those with a certain form of cancer were diagnosed by MRI compared with 56 per cent by mammography.

The cancer known as ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) affects the milk ducts in the breast and was found in 167 women. DCIS is different from the majority of invasive cancers which cause a lump in the breast.

The MRI scans were much better at spotting aggressive or 'high grade' DCIS, the findings published in The Lancet medical journal (must credit) showed.

Of 89 women with high grade DCIS, 98 per cent were diagnosed by MRI but only 52 per cent by mammography. Almost half of these cases would therefore have been missed without the MRI scans.

Despite picking up more high grade cases, MRI did not result in a larger number of false positive diagnoses but there were more biopsies carried out which turned out to be non-malignant.

The tests were carried out at the University of Bonn Hospital in Germany. The study's authors, led by Professor Christiane Kuhl, wrote "MRI could help improve the ability to diagnose DCIS, especially DCIS with high nuclear grade.

"Our data justify further investigations of the role of MRI for diagnosing DCIS."

Lead Dutch researchers Dr Carla Boetes and Dr Ritse Mann said: "MRI should thus no longer be regarded as an adjunct to mammography but as a distinct method to detect breast cancer in its earliest stage.

"A large multicentre breast-screening trial with MRI in the general population is essential."

However, British doctors say scans are best employed to identify high-risk cases. Because they also identify suspected abnormalities that turn out to be false alarms, many more women would have needless biopsies where tissue is taken to rule out cancer.

Dr Nicholas Perry, consultant radiologist and director of the London Breast Institute, said using MRI scans in favour of mammography for screening was no guarantee of picking up significantly more cancers.

He said: "It is not feasible or desirable to use MR scanning, quite apart from the substantally increased costs. It throws up all sorts of unimportant things that require a biopsy which then turns out to be benign.

"The first rule of screening is to do more good than harm, but MR scanning on a population basis threatens to do more harm because it would increase the biopsy rate. There is no evidence it would lead to detection of more cancers. In this study many of the women already had a diagnosis of breast cancer and the MR scan was being used to confirm it.

"It is currently used in Britain for selected, very high risk cases where it is effective and has an important role."

Dr Emma Pennery, nurse consultant at Breast Cancer Care, said: "This study extends our existing knowledge about the accuracy of MRIs in diagnosing DCIS, suggesting they are more accurate than mammograms in this area.

"However, it is unclear as to who exactly will benefit most from MRIs as the study included a mixed population of women, some of whom were attending routine breast screening, some being followed up after breast cancer treatment or others who had a significant family history of the disease.

"Further research is needed to clarify what implications this has on the way DCIS is currently diagnosed, and when it is most appropriate and efficient to use MRIs."

Pamela Goldberg, Chief Executive, Breast Cancer Campaign added: "All women should be breast aware ? to know what is normal for you and see your health professional if you are concerned."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

