TITLE	SUZANNE MOORE: I'm sick of being told it's all our fault

Last updated at 10:24 12 August 2007

Let me list the things that may increase your risk of cancer . . .

Eating too much, drinking alcohol (even one glass of wine a day), smoking, sunbathing, taking cheap flights in order to sunbathe, having a career, being poor, having children late in life, having no children, having IVF, eating meat, taking HRT and, not to worry you, being stressed.

In short, hedonism will give you cancer. But being a miserable puritan is no guarantor of a cancer-free existence.

Got that? Now do you feel better? Although more than a quarter of us will get cancer anyway, we are preoccupied with preventing this disease through ever more ominous 'lifestyle' changes.

I would like to ban the word 'lifestyle' which erupted with yuppie abandon in the mid-Eighties.

Now we don't have lives any more, just 'lifestyles' which makes everything sound like a choice. You can choose a healthier lifestyle and therefore you can choose not to get cancer.

But no one chooses cancer. We all know blameless vegetarians with cancer, nonsmokers with tumours in their lungs, beautiful young mothers with mastectomies.

We are being told certain cancers are on the increase because we are not heeding 'lifestyle' advice. But take, for example, the doubling rates of malignant melanoma - the groups studied were sunbathing 20 years ago when there was far less advice on protection from the sun. To talk now of recklessness is hardly helpful.

The 'blaming the victim' mentality we now associate with cancer is the result of two things. One is an awareness that as more of us live longer the NHS will not be able to cope and could cut health care by separating out the deserving and undeserving ill.

The other is the cross-over between cancer and other chronic illness.

We know obesity is implicated in diabetes and heart disease and is also a risk factor in cancer too. So will we be a healthier society if we deprive the obese, smoking, binge-drinking classes of health care? I hardly think so.

Cancer is spoken of in strangely New Age terms, even by people who should know better.

Diabetes and heart disease are not seen as something patients have brought on themselves or a result of suppressing emotions.

But the 'happy people don't fall sick' model still prevails in the cancer world.

Of course people undergoing treatment may benefit from a positive attitude and a dab of aromatherapy, but this should not be emotionally compulsory.

As the admirable Jenni Murray, who has breast cancer, says: 'Everyone copes in their own way.' What empowers one person may depress another.

Relaxation tapes proffered by a well meaning friend did not help my terminally ill mother who had not relaxed in her entire life.

While stoking fears that we are the 'cancer generation', it is easy to ignore the real advances being made.

Cervical cancer rates are down thanks to screening, lung cancer rates in men are down, MRI scans may be far more effective than mammograms in detecting breast cancer early.

We don't hear much good news. Instead we have an epidemic of seemingly random and contradictory information to remind us that if we are irresponsible about our pleasures, we will somehow be responsible for our fatal diseases. Hardly benign.

Amy Winehouse

We have liked Amy Winehouse in our house since she was big. I mean when she was a busty, sassy wench and her first album, Frank, came out.

Now she actually is big in star terms, she has shrunk accordingly, falling prey to that obscene formula that the more powerful women become in the world the less physical space they must take up.

Whatever her demons, none of us can doubt she is a huge star.

Comparisons with Pete Doherty are inane.

The girl has more natural talent in one of her hair extensions than he does in his entire gormless frame.

She is young enough to clean up her act.

I am sure, like everything else, Amy will do it in her own way.

God love her.

Face it, who needs this bizarre gang?

OK, so I am fustily out of the loop, but this Facebook thing sure is weird. Even I have had requests to be somebody's friend (!) and it makes one feel like an eight-year-old in the playground.

Shockingly, I am used to people asking me for drinks or dinner or just to nip round, but no one has asked me directly to be their 'friend' since I was a little girl.

For sophisticated networking, it all strikes me as rather gauche. So, do you wanna be in my gang?

Stop carping,Ingrid

So to Ingrid Tarrant's tales of horrible husband Chris.

He smelled of carp and was carp in bed. Sorry, crap in bed. He needed Viagra. Like I care, Ingrid?

You are getting the big house, you are on telly a lot yourself now, you have kids who read this stuff.

It is demeaning because the obvious question is why this woman stayed with such an awful man for so many years if it wasn't just for the money.

The G and T (Gifted and Talented) scheme in schools is a farce.

Of course, ten per cent of them aren't Gin and Tonics, as us less pushy mums call them.

My own little G and T once got special maths lessons.

Not because she was any good but to make up the numbers. Literally.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

