TITLE	Pill's legacy of peril

By James Chapman

The safety of contraceptive pills is thrown into doubt today by a study suggesting some have heightened the risk of breast cancer for certain women.

Those with a family history of cancer who took the first-generation Pill before 1975 have a far greater chance of developing the disease, scientists found.

The discovery means thousands of women in their forties and older may be at risk.

The report offers the first evidence that high doses of hormones in the early Pill can increase the possibility of cancer in women already genetically disposed towards the illness. They are between three and 11 times more likely to develop the disease, the experts say.

The scientists recommend that women who suspect they are in this category should be 'particularly vigilant' about examining their breasts for signs of tumours, and should go for regular screening by experts.

Researchers were unable to reach a conclusion about the risk from more recent types of the Pill, which contain lower doses of hormone.

But they say women at high risk of breast cancer should think carefully about taking even today's contraceptive pills.

The American scientists, based at the internationally-renowned Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, investigated the families of 426 women with breast cancer.

Those in the study included 394 sisters and daughters of breast cancer patients, 3,002 granddaughters and nieces, and 2,754 women who married into the families.

Researchers concluded that the risk of developing the disease was 3.3 times greater for breast cancer patients' sisters and daughters who had used oral contraceptives compared to those with similar family history who had never used them.

For women in families in which five or more blood relatives had breast or ovarian cancer, the risk was even higher. The sisters and daughters of these patients were 11.4 times more likely to develop breast cancer if they had taken the Pill than if they had not.

Writing in the Journal of the American Medical Association, the scientists say that the higher risk for the close relatives of breast cancer patients was particularly evident for women who had used oral contraceptives introduced before 1975. These pills were more likely to contain higher doses of oestrogen and progestin than today's varieties.

'If there is a risk associated with current formulations, we probably don't have the data to detect it,' explained Dr Thomas Sellers, who led the study.

'What our data suggests is that it is early formulations with high doses of oestrogen and progestins that pose a risk, not later ones.

'We knew that oral contraceptive use is weakly associated with breast cancer risk in the general population, but the association among women with a familial predisposition to the disease was less clear.

'This new study gives us more information for that population. It provides information that must be considered in light of the recommendations that have been made for women at high genetic risk for breast or ovarian cancer to use oral contraceptives to reduce the risk of ovarian cancer. 'Although there is a good body of scientific evidence that use of oral contraceptives does lower risk of ovarian cancer, we need to be sure that this doesn't come at the expense of an increased risk for breast cancer.'

'These results don't apply for women at average risk for breast cancer, who should not interpret the study as reason to change their contraceptive practices.'

British experts backed this advice. Professor Michael Baum, of University College, London, a leading breast cancer surgeon and chairman of the Cancer Research Campaign's breast cancer trials group, said: 'Most important is that women should not be frightened off the Pill.

'Every time there's a Pill scare, there's an increase in unwanted pregnancies and abortions which carry their own risk of mortality.

'This study applies to oral contraceptives pre-1975, and not to those available today, and only to women with a genetic predisposition to breast cancer.' Professor Baum said only about one in 1,000 women under the age of 50 develops breast cancer.

So even if the study's conclusions are correct, the old-style Pill would account for only an extra two cases per 1,000 women among those with one relative with cancer.

He added: 'I think the current pattern of screening is probably sufficiently vigilant, but if any women are particularly worried, they should ask to see their consultant.' Angela Reynolds, the Family Planning Association's information officer, said the study is 'another piece of the jigsaw'.

She added: 'This brings in new evidence that sheds light on some groups of women that are more at risk than others.'

She said another study in 1996 had shown a general - but tiny - added risk of breast cancer for all women taking the Pill , currently about 3.5million in Britain.

But, she added, this was offset by the benefits the Pill offered in birth control and an apparently reduced risk of ovarian cancer.

The risk to all women also disappeared ten years after they stopped taking the contraceptives.

She said there are also suggestions that if a woman on the Pill did develop breast cancer, she tended to have tumours that were more localised and less likely to spread.

j.chapman@dailymail.co.uk

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

