TITLE	The pill that may end sunburn

by NAOMI COLEMAN, femail.co.uk

A pill to help prevent skin cancer and end the suffering of sunburn could be available in Britain within months.

The new drug called BioAstin - already available in America - has shown to reduce sunburn by up to 50 per cent.

It was originally marketed as a dietary supplement in the US, but users discovered it also appeared to protect them from the sun.

Early trials show a chemical in the drug extracted from algae - called astaxanthin - protects the body against ultraviolet rays - and therefore sunburn.

Unlike sun creams it does not wash off in water and acts on the whole body, rather than specific areas. But makers are advising customers to use suntan cream as well as the pills to ensure they are fully protected from the sun.

BioAstin could reduce sunburn by 50 per cent

If it is approved by the Medicines Control Agency (MCA) - the body which licences all drugs in Britain - it could become available in Britain later this year.

Continuous sunburn over a long period of time - usually twenty to thirty years - can eventually lead to skin cancer - the most common cancer in Britain.

There are three main types of skin cancer which can affect all age groups. Malignant melanoma affects around 5,000 people a year; while around 40,000 people a year are diagnosed with the more common squamous and basal cell cancers.

In malignant melanoma, tell tale signs of the disease typically appear as a mole. In squamous and basal cell cancers, skin coloured lumps form on the skin which quickly ulcerate.

Experts say developing skin cancer is dependent on skin type and family history. Those with fair skin and freckles are more likely to develop the disease.

However, a large proportion of people have already been damaged by sunburn during childhood. For most people, experts say, 80 per cent of sun exposure has occurred by the age of 18.

Catherine Harwood, consultant dermatologist at the Royal London Hospital said: 'A sun tan is a sign that the skin is being damaged by too much sunlight.

'The worry is that people will think taking a drug will provide the answer to skin cancer. It is unlikely that a pill will eliminate the risk of skin cancer.'

Cancer charities welcomed the new pill with cautious optimism.

'The research is very interesting, but more trials are needed to prove the safety of this drug in this country,' said a Cancer Research Campaign spokesman.

'The pill appears to be licensed as a dietary supplement rather than a suntan cream. As far as I can see there is no mechanism to explain why a chemical which protects algae should have the same effect on people.

'The advice is anyone wanting to take the pill should also use sun tan cream.'

Dr Gerald Cysewski, of Hawaiia-based Cynaotech, which developed the drug, claimed: 'The potential of BioAstin to prevent sun burn is highly significant. While further work is required, a systemic sunscreen based on BioAstin could benefit a large number of people.'

The Medical Controls Agency said: 'If a product has already been licensed in America and the relevant data is approved by the MCA, the drug could be available in Britain in a matter of months.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

