TITLE	Why women should avoid using anti-perspirants that could cause breast cancer

By PROFESSSOR ROBERT THOMAS

Last updated at 15:55 13 September 2007

Here, a leading breast cancer specialist explains why he suggests avoiding the products:

Women who have had breast cancer should consider not using antiperspirants or deodorants.

And healthy women should think twice about it, especially those with a strong family history or other risk factors.

This is what I suggest to my patients and my own family. Giving up using deodorant could be as effective in reducing cancer risk as a diet rich in disease-preventing antioxidants.

This might sound surprising, as we know fruit and vegetables can help keep cancer at bay.

But the irony is that women - who are particularly diligent about eating enough fruit and veg - then cover their armpits every day with chemicals that mimic oestrogen, the cancer-promoting hormone.

Like many oncologists I routinely discuss with patients their lifestyle risks as well as the benefits of chemotherapy, hormones and Herceptin.

These factors include their exposure to potential dietary carcinogens, fat intake, level of exercise and exposure to pollutants - and deodorants.

Though a direct link with cancer has not been established, my view on deodorants is based on the available evidence and informed common sense.

This week, a study at Keele University found aluminium salts - used to block the pores so you don't perspire - can get into breast tissue.

Worryingly, these salts are more concentrated in the areas of the breast where cancer is more likely to develop - on the side and towards the armpit.

This study follows on from one done two years ago at the University of Reading, which showed aluminium salts can behave like oestrogen in the body.

This study also found that the preservative parabens used in these products has also been found in breast cancers.

Another part of the jigsaw came from a U.S. researcher, who has found that the more often women use anti-perspirants or deodorants (which make you smell nice without blocking the sweating) and shave their armpits, the earlier cancer is likely to appear.

What all this suggests is that using these products may make breast cancer more likely.

I'm very much aware there is no clear proof anti-perspirants or deodorants cause cancer, but with one in nine women developing the disease, it seems sensible to be cautious and not take unnecessary risks.

Of course, industry commentators such as the Cosmetic, Toiletry and Perfumery Association dismiss this latest research and claim there is no evidence for a link between breast cancer and anti-perspirants.

But I say: Why take the risk? We are surrounded by carcinogens and we can handle a certain amount, so the sensible thing is not to add to your exposure unnecessarily.

The point about deodorants is that once you get into the habit, you are going to use them every day for years, which means you build up a lot of exposure to a potential carcinogen.

I've been increasingly impressed by the impact lifestyle changes can have on the effectiveness of cancer treatment.

In response to the needs and desires of patients, I have established a major lifestyle research unit at the Primrose unit at Bedford Hospital.

I began to look around to see what could improve the effectiveness of cancer treatment.

I've just published a paper on the foods that raise the risk of prostate cancer, for instance.

Most people know there is a link between fried food and a cancercausing chemical called acrylamide, so it makes sense to cut down on barbecued food.

But I've found that some rather surprising foods, such as vegetable crisps and cream crackers, also have high levels of acrylamides, so it makes sense to cut down on these as well.

Though improving diet is important, I believe that an equally significant consideration is your use of deodorant.

The sensible thing is to cut down. Don't use them every day - only at those times when you really feel a need.

Then try alternating brands so you don't keep on having exactly the same combination of chemicals.

Some say there is more risk with anti-perspirants than deodorants, but I believe that the less chemicals to which you expose your body on a daily basis the better.

There is a lot you can do just by washing thoroughly.

I'm certainly opposed to my family using deodorants and anti-perspirants.

My partner uses a natural crystal and she smells just fine.

Men could also think about their exposure to chemicals. In our household, this means my 14-year-old son will use a deodorant only if he is going to a party (my ten-year-old is too young).

If I had girls, I would be even more strict about it.

No doubt my fellow oncologists wouldn't want to commit themselves to such a definite position on the use of deodorants, but they would agree with the need to keep our exposure to chemicals to a minimum.

Not wearing a deodorant every day is not as bad is it sounds, and it could even be good for you.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

