TITLE	The deodorant safety guide: How picking the right brand could save your life

Last updated at 15:54 13 September 2007

Most women have used deodorant for years without a second thought, yet following research published last week many might now be thinking twice before applying it.

A potential link between aluminium - commonly found in the form of aluminium salts in anti-perspirants - and breast cancer was found in the study by Chris Exley, at Keele University.

A higher content of aluminium was found in breast tissue samples - taken from 17 women with breast cancer who had mastectomies at Wythenshawe Hospital in Manchester - near the underarm area where anti-perspirants and deodorants are applied.

Scroll down for more... 

The good deodorant guide could be your answer to perfuming safely

"Although the presence of aluminium in the breast does not, in itself, imply any causal link to breast cancer, it does underline the need for more research, especially in view of the known toxicity of aluminium," says Dr Exley.

Aluminum salts are a form of metal and work by blocking the pores that produce perspiration, hence their use in anti-perspirants.

They may be listed in the ingredients on the bottle as aluminium chlorohydrate or aluminium zirconium.

"We know from research that aluminium applied under the arm appears in the urine, so it does permeate through the skin," says Dr Exley, the lead researcher in the Keele study.

Some natural deodorants also use a crystal form of aluminium (known as ammonium alum).

Although these are sold as deodorants rather than anti-perspirants - the ammonium alum is supposed to control the growth of bacteria rather than block the pores - "aluminium found in breast tissue is as likely to come from these aluminium-based natural products as it is from conventional anti-perspirants," says Dr Exley.

Deodorants do not usually contain aluminium as they are designed to prevent odour by using fragrance as well as reducing the levels of underarm bacteria.

They may, however, contain parabens, a preservative also found in other cosmetics such as shampoos, body lotions and liquid soaps.

A 2004 study by Dr Philippa Darbre, a senior lecturer in oncology at the University of Reading, found evidence of parabens in breast tumours.

"Parabens can mimic the action of oestrogen and there is a link between oestrogen and breast cancer," she says.

Many products act as both antiperspirants and deodorants so may contain both aluminium salts and parabens.

Experts are divided over their use. Last week in the Mail, Professor Robert Thomas, a leading breast cancer specialist, suggested that women who'd had breast cancer, as well as those who were otherwise healthy, should think twice about using an anti-perspirant or deodorant every day.

Dr Darbre, who has spent 25 years studying oestrogen action in breast cancer, says while there is no proof yet that any of these ingredients can cause breast cancer, "it does not sound sensible to apply a mixture of chemicals under the arms and around the breast as this could cause a build-up of toxic overload over the years".

"I have not been using deodorants for ten years and simply wash twice a day with soap and water.

"If you do use a deodorant, use as little as possible and avoid shaving first as any tiny nicks in the skin will mean easier access for the chemicals."

However, according to the charity Breakthrough Breast Cancer, there is "no reliable scientific evidence to suggest a link between deodorant or anti-perspirant use and breast cancer - this very small study does not provide any further proof".

The manufacturers themselves are emphatic.

"Consumers should be absolutely reassured that antiperspirants are completely safe," says Dr Christopher Flower, director-general of the Cosmetic, Toiletry and Perfumery Association.

"Only vanishingly small amounts of aluminium are absorbed through the skin - 0.01 per cent.

"You get 50 times this amount from foods."

Dr Flower also says there is no health risk from parabens: "The potency of parabens in products such as deodorants is a million times lower than in the birth control pill and that is considered safe."

For some women this will be reassurance enough. But if you want to make sure you avoid these ingredients, check out our table (right) listing the contents of the most popular brands of anti-perspirants and deodorants.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

