TITLE	The Pill 'reduces the risk of cancer in later life'

By JENNY HOPE

Last updated at 08:34 14 September 2007

The Pill protects against cancer as well as pregnancy, say doctors.

A huge study shows that most women using the contraceptive are at lower risk of developing any type of the disease.

They gain most protection at a time when they are at greatest risk - during their 50s and 60s - because of the long-term preventive effect of oral contraception.

Researchers found a slightly increased cancer risk for a minority who take the Pill for more than eight years. This mainly involves cervical cancer. But they claimed this could be offset with regular screening.

Around three million women take one of the many versions of the modern contraceptive Pill.

There have been hundreds of studies into its safety since it was launched in 1961, with some showing benefits and others claiming it increases cancer risk.

The latest study published today in the British Medical Journal online, looked at data on 46,000 women held by the Royal College of General Practitioners since 1968.

It found a 12 per cent lower risk of cancer among women who used the Pill at some time during their lives.

There was no extra risk of breast cancer for Pill users, and a 29 per cent fall in risk for the main gynaecological cancers, such as ovarian. They also had lower rates of large bowel and rectal cancer.

Evidence suggests the protective effect of taking the Pill lasts for at least 15 years after stopping.

Professor Philip Hannaford, of Aberdeen University, who led the researchers, said: "The message is reassuring. It shows early benefits from the 30s and then women get more protection as they get older."

Professor Hannaford said around a quarter of women in the study who took the Pill for eight years or longer had a 22 per cent extra risk of developing cancer, mainly cervical cancer.

But this was probably because the study included women taking it in the 1960s and 1970s before regular cervical cancer screening was set up, which detects and treats suspicious symptoms at an early stage.

The research - one of the largest detailed studies of the Pill - looked at data spanning a 36-year period. The women taking part had an average age of 29, with half already using oral contraceptives while the remainder had never taken them.

The average Pill user in the study took it for 44 months.

Dr Anne Szarewski, clinical consultant at Cancer Research UK, said: "This is good news for women. It will be extremely reassuring that the Pill is not linked to an overall increased risk of developing cancer, especially breast cancer, as this is what women worry about most."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

