TITLE	Could gold dust help beat cancer?

by PAT HAGAN

Last updated at 09:11 25 September 2007

Gold dust could be a valuable new weapon against cancer - helping to "smuggle" drugs past the body's immune system and into tumours.

Scientists have succeeded in attaching molecules of an anticancer drug to gold particles just a fraction of the width of a human hair.

The particles are so small they can sneak past the body's defence mechanisms without being destroyed and deliver the cancer-killing medicine to the heart of the tumour.

Scroll down for more...

Good as gold: a valuable weapon against cancer

The new technique, being developed at Rice University in Houston, Texas, could reduce some of the more unpleasant side-effects suffered by cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy.

Many suffer hair loss, nausea and are at increased risk from infections because the toxic drugs suppress their immune system.

This happens because chemotherapy drugs injected into the body attack healthy as well as cancerous tissues.

Scientists hope the gold dust therapy will reduce the amount of toxic medicine affecting the body by delivering more of it to the tumour itself.

Cancer affects an estimated one in three people in Britain at some point in their lives.

Many women with breast or ovarian cancer are treated with Taxol, the chemotherapy drug used by scientists in the gold dust experiments.

Taxol was first develarrayoped 40 years ago from the bark of the yew tree, and has helped thousands of women in Britain overcome their disease.

It works by attaching itself to the framework inside a cell.

When a cell is dividing, one of the first things it does is start to break down that inner framework so it can form new cells.

But Taxol stops that breakdown from happening, preventing cancer cells from replicating.

Although it is very effective at slowing the growth of tumours, many scientists believe Taxol and other chemotherapy drugs would be more efficient if they could find a way of getting more of it into malignant tissue rather than healthy tissue.

Gold dust could provide the answer.

Gold has been used in medicine for many years. Since the 1930s, patients with rheumatoid arthritis have been treated with gold jabs to reduce swelling in knees and wrists.

Its biggest advantage is that it is non-toxic and is safe inside the body.

It has already been used by other teams of scientists to diagnose cancer.

They attach gold dust to antibody cells that home in on cancer when they detect that it is present in the body.

These cells then transport the gold to the tumour site.

Under a scan, the gold particles shine brightly, revealing the exact location of the cancer. The latest breakthrough goes one step further in using gold to treat the tumours.

Professor Eugene Zubarev, who led the research on the gold dust therapy, said the size of the particles is crucial to the success of the treatment.

The particles are just two nanometres in diameter, about 5,000 times smaller than a human hair. "That small size allows them to avoid fast removal by the immune system.

"If they were much bigger, they could be destroyed long before they reach their target," he says.

"This small size is also important because it allows them to pass through holes in tumour blood vessels.

"In general, the blood vessels that feed a tumour have lots of holes in them up to 1,000 nanometres in diameter.

"This makes them leaky and means they allow the small gold particles to leave the blood stream and accumulate inside the tumour.

"Healthy blood vessels, on the other hand, don't have too many of these holes."

The gold dust then passes harmlessly through the liver before being excreted in the body's waste products.

Professor David Russell, from the University of East Anglia, who is investigating a similar technique using gold to get drugs into tumours, said the cost of the precious metal is not an issue.

"Gold is perfect because it gets underneath the immune system and does not get rejected by the body. But it's not expensive because the quantities of gold involved are minute.

"We're talking pennies. In fact, it's the drugs that are used which cost the money."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

