TITLE	Parents told chips can cause cancer

By FIONA MACRAE

Last updated at 17:49 14 October 2007

Parents are being urged to stop giving their children chips amid fears they dramatically increase the risk of breast cancer.

Serving under-fives chips just once a week raises their risk of breast cancer by 27 per cent, shocking new research has shown.

And toddlers and young girls who eat chips every day could be doubling their chance of developing the disease which claims 13,000 lives in Britain each year.

It is thought the fat the chips are fried in could be carcinogenic, with the young tissue found in children being particularly vulnerable to damage which only shows up years later.

Previous studies have shown a link between saturated fats and breast cancer.

Last night, health and nutrition experts warned parents of the dangers of giving their children junk food.

Azmina Govindji, of the British Dietetic Association, said: "Chips should definitely not be part of a child's every day diet."

Sarah Stanner, of the British Nutrition Foundation, said: "Too many chips are bad for a child's health.

"Diets high in saturated fats are linked to breast cancer, prostate cancer, colon cancer and heart disease and various other disease such as diabetes. Our advice would be for parents to try to get their children to eat more fruit and vegetables."

Professor Tim Key, of Cancer Research UK, said: "People should aim to eat five portions of fruit and vegetables a day and try not to eat too many foods that are high in added fat, such as chips."

The US study looked at how 30 different foods eaten between the ages of three and five affect the risk of breast cancer in adulthood.

Scientists from Harvard Medical School compared the childhood diets of almost 600 nurses with breast cancer with the eating habits of a group of women free from breast-cancer.

The women's mothers were asked how often their daughters had eaten foods such as apples, oranges, eggs, bread, potatoes, beef burgers, ice cream, hot dogs and chips. They were also asked to remember whether their daughters had drunk milk or orange juice.

Analysis showed eating chips once a week significantly increased the risk of breast cancer. Eating broccoli slightly increased the risk, while drinking whole milk slightly reduced the risk.

Other junk foods such as ice cream and hot dogs were not linked to risk of cancer, according to results published in the International Journal of Cancer.

Lead researcher Dr Karin Michels said: "We found girls who ate French fries once a week had a 27 per cent greater risk of developing breast cancer in later life compared to those who never or rarely ate French fries.

"The risk increases with each serving, so it is possible eating French fries every day would double your risk."

"We didn't find any that any other fast food or food considered unhealthy was associated with increased breast cancer risk.

"The French fries really stood out.

"This study provides additional evidence that breast cancer may originate during the early phases of a woman's life and that eating habits during that phase may be particularly important to reduce the risk of breast cancer."

Eating boiled and baked potatoes did not affect the women's risk of cancer, meaning the problem could lie in the way in chips are cooked.

Dr Michels said: "As consumption of potatoes themselves was not associated with the risk of breast cancer, the preparation of French fries, namely the use of frying fat high in saturated fats and trans-fatty acids, may be of relevance."

She said that chips also contain a chemical called acrylamide which can cause cancer in rats. However, a recent study showed fears it increased the risk of breast cancer in women were unfounded.

The epidemiologist said that further work was needed, as her results could have been skewed by the mothers' ability to remember what they fed their daughters as children.

She said: "Breast cancer is a devastating disease and research such as this is important in helping guide future studies that will demonstrate how women can reduce the risk of this deadly disease.

"Given the obesity epidemic among children and their unhealthy eating habits, this is one more reason to avoid French fries."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

