TITLE	Why the sun is good for you

by Dr JOHN BRIFFA

Pretty much all of us will have got the message by now that too much sunlight can cause skin cancer.

However, a recent study conducted by the charity Imperial Cancer Research Fund (ICRF) suggests not all of us are taking heed of this advice.

According to the report, three-quarters of us prefer a tanned look, and as many as one in seven still want a tan even after experiencing the worry of potential skin cancer.

The ICRF's tone suggests that many of us are acting irresponsibly in the name of vanity. But are we?

While sunlight may increase the risk of skin cancer, what is less well publicised is that it can also help prevent illness.

There is quite a body of evidence that suggests sunlight protects us against several conditions, including depression, heart disease and - believe it or not - some cancers.

Is it possible that by shying away from the sun, we might be doing ourselves more harm than good?

Skin cancer affects about 50,000 Britons every year. The majority of these are basal cell and squamus cell carcinomas. They are usually treatable and rarely life-threatening.

The type of skin cancer which often proves fatal is malignant melanoma. This makes up about 10pc of all skin cancers and kills about 2,000 Britons each year.

Much of the health information regarding limiting sun exposure has been directed at reducing the incidence of melanoma.

There seems to be evidence that burning and/or occasional exposure to intense sunlight, particularly in childhood, tends to increase the risk of melanoma.

However, the relationship between sunlight exposure and melanoma is not as clear as you might think.

For instance, in a study published in 1996 in the medical journal Oncology, men who had most exposure to the sun through their work actually had a reduced risk of melanoma.

The theory is that habitual exposure to sunlight can induce the skin to develop self-protective mechanisms against it.

Also, melanoma can often form in parts of the body that are not directly exposed to sunlight, such as the soles of the feet.

This again does not support the link between sunlight exposure and melanoma risk.

While the balance of evidence suggests that to avoid melanoma it is important to protect the skin from intense sun, and particularly burning, how much protection is offered by more extreme avoidance is far from clear.

In addition, even the concept of protecting the skin by using sunscreens is open to question. At least two studies have found that sunscreen use is associated with an increased risk of melanoma.

It may be that although sunscreens help prevent burning, they still allow the transmission of forms of ultraviolet light associated with melanoma.

It therefore seems prudent that when the sun is at its hottest we should avoid it - staying indoors or under a parasol - or wear suitably protective clothing.

Despite all the negative messages we hear about sunlight, it's hard to deny that most us prefer sunny weather. However, its benefits go far deeper than this.

It appears to have a profound effect on mood, and lack of sunlight is thought to be the major factor in a depression which occurs in the darker months, known as seasonal affective disorder (SAD).

Sunlight is also important for the production of vitamin D, a deficiency of which may manifest as increased risk of bone fracture, muscle weakness and immune system problems.

But even more surprising is research that shows that sunlight exposure may actually reduce the risk of certain cancers.

Studies show that a 10 per cent reduction in sunlight exposure leads to an increased incidence of breast cancer of between 6 per cent and 10 per cent, and a 7 per cent to 12 per cent increase in colon cancer cases.

Even if we assume only a 6 per cent rise in each of these two cancers from avoiding sun, this still equates to about 2,000 extra deaths in the UK each year.

Yet reducing sunlight exposure will prevent only a proportion of the 2,000 deaths which occur each year from melanoma.

So while avoiding excessive exposure to sunlight and sunburn may be important, the time has come to recognise the sun's health-giving properties.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

