TITLE	Dance your way back to fitness

Last updated at 17:11 19 October 2007

After two lots of surgery for cancer in her left breast, Alison, a working mother aged 45, was "very unfit ? I really needed to get my body toned again".

More seriously, because the surgery included having all the lymph glands removed from her left armpit, she couldn't lift her arm ? which meant she couldn't start radiotherapy 'because you must lie with your arm above your head' during treatment.

Scroll down for more...

Dance your way back into fitness

Alison was also at risk of lymphoedema, a recognised complication after breast surgery (especially when the lymph nodes are removed), and sometimes after radiotherapy.

It's caused by a build-up of lymph fluid (which would normally remove excess fluid from the body's tissues) in the upper arm, causing unsightly swelling, discomfort and a dull ache.

Regular gentle exercise is recommended to prevent and treat lymphoedema.

The Breast Cancer Haven, a centre for complementary therapies, suggested Alison try the Lebed Method, a dance-based movement programme designed for breast cancer sufferers and now used in hospitals and healthcare facilities in 12 countries.

"It's very gentle stretching and slow smooth moves," she explains. The Lebed Method was devised in 1980 by Sherry Lebed, an American dance movement specialist, and her doctor brothers to help their mother, who had breast cancer, regain movement and balance and also improve her low state of mind.

In 1996, Sherry was diagnosed with breast cancer and developed lymphoedema three years later. She expanded the method to include specific moves to help reduce the swelling of lymphoedema, working alongside manual lymphatic drainage massage, bandaging and skincare.

Julia Williams, who practises complementary therapy at the Haven and also Trinity Hospice, teaches the Lebed Method to patients and also trains instructors:

"After surgery, the biggest problem is always a limited range of motion. There are a lot of upper body movements, taken from ballet, jazz and physical therapy, which really help to get the muscles working and the upper body strong."

"They're also designed to open the lymphatic system so that the lymph can flow smoothly round the body."

The Lebed Method is good for many conditions besides breast cancer, such as arthritis, fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue syndrome and Parkinson's disease, says Julia, and men take part as well as women.

"The movements are brilliant for repetitive strain injury, too, and one lass with motor neurone disease does the classes in her wheelchair."

To get people to breathe properly, Julia asks them to blow soap bubbles: "You automatically breathe from your chest and laugh, which opens the lymph system."

Participants can choose any type of rhythmic music and use props such as feather boas, bowler hats and beach balls.

"It's nice to have that fun element with other people and be in a setting where you're not feeling like a patient," says Alison.

After a course of six weekly classes, Alison regained full movement in her shoulder and was able to proceed with radiotherapy. "I would recommend it to anyone," she says.

Julia Williams, tel: 07734 511287, e-mail: julia-williams@lineone.net Breast Cancer Haven, tel: 020 7384 0099, breastcancerhaven.org.uk (centres in London, Leeds and Hereford). Trinity Hospice, tel: 020 7787 1000, trinityhospice.org.uk. For information about the Lebed Method, see lebedmethod.com

Lymphoedema Support Network, lymphoedema.org

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

