TITLE	Thalidomide is back - but those scarred by it the first time fear it is a terrible mistake

By JULIET RIX

Last updated at 22:43 22 October 2007

Rosie and Stephen, both in their mid-40s, live with their son James, aged 12, in a bungalow in Cardiff. The couple run a training consultancy and James goes to school, plays rugby and rides his bike with his mates.

So far, so straightforward. But Stephen has no legs and Rosie has no limbs at all - only four fingers attached to her shoulders, and feet with 13 toes.

Scroll down for more ...

Rosie was a happy little girl despite her disabilities and her parents made sure she lived as normal life as possible

Rosie and Stephen are ?thalidomiders? - two of the 10,000 or so people worldwide born in the early Sixties to mothers who took the ?completely safe anti-morning sickness pill thalidomide. Now, the couple are watching with increasing discomfort as momentum grows for the re-introduction of thalidomide as a licensed drug in this country.

The Lancet has just reported that thalidomide may help increase life expectancy in older people with the incurable blood cancer multiple myeloma.

Thalidomide is already being used by at least 13,000 people in Europe, on a special ?named patient? basis. But Pharmion, the company that distributes the drug in Europe (and supported the research) has applied for a licence, which means regulation would be less stringent and the number of users would substantially rise.

For those affected by the thalidomide disaster, the idea of a new licence for the drug is a dilemma, says Rosie. On the one hand, she has no desire to deny anyone a drug that might help them. On the other, she doesn?t want to see the birth of another generation of thalidomide impaired people.

It would be hard to find a more positive human being than Rosie, but life as one of the 450 surviving British thalidomiders hasn'?t been easy. As she explains in her new book, Rosie was born with the classic impairment, phocomelia (Greek for ?seal-limbed?).

Scroll down for more ...

A life of triumph against all odds: Rosie Moriarty-Simmonds

Her parents were immediately pressured by doctors and priests to put her in an institution - the fate of nearly half of all thalidomide children. On one occasion, her mum and dad reached the gates of an orphanage with Rosie in their arms, but quickly turned back. ?Standing outside this palatial, gloomy building, they paused and, without even saying a word to each other, turned and took me back home,? she says.

Even so, she spent much of her early life in hospital undergoing operation after operation. ?On seeing an imperfect body, doctors feel compelled to try to make it more like the norm,? says Rosie. ?From a personal point of view, it would have been more comfortable had I been found by an archaeologist - at least they preserve damaged goods!? The doctors were insistent. It wasn'?t just operations but artificial limbs - the ?mechanical paraphernalia constantly being ?wired, bolted and screwed? painfully to her body, recalls Rosie.

So unsteady did some of the lower limb contraptions make Rosie and her peers, that ?the doctors solicitously fitted us with crash helmets, transforming us into ?"Metal Mickeys", a process that rather defeated their purpose of making us less conspicuous?.

She was also fitted with compressed-air arms. Powered from a canister strapped to her back, they were a nightmare to manipulate: "?The doctors failed to notice I could perform all the tasks much quicker and more easily using the resources nature had provided me with."

Just one good thing came out of all the limb fittings she attended - she met a little boy who was being fitted with prosthetic legs. His name was Stephen.

Meanwhile, at home Rosie was never made to feel particularly different. Her sisters pushed her around in her wheelchair and her parents ensured that whatever the family did, Rosie did too.

Only much later did she realise just how hard this must have been, especially as the family had little money. Rosie wonders now whether the strain - along with misplaced guilt - contributed to her mother's early death at just 49.

Thalidomide was withdrawn in 1961, but it was not until 1968 - after a long court battle in which the parents brought a class action - that compensation was agreed. Rosie, then aged eight, remembers being "?paraded before a panel of ?experts" - mostly men - stripped to my underpants? - for a compensation assessment.

?"We were expected to ?"do tricks" - walk, do this, do that. Of course, we did our very best and really tried to show what we could do, when really we should have been showing what we couldn'?t."

The revelation of the cause of her impairments turned Rosie from an apparent freak of nature to victim of medical error, she says, and led to some specially organised holidays and outings. Many people were sympathetic too, but not everyone.

On one occasion, Rosie?'s youngest sister, Denise, pushed her to a corner shop and parked her inside the door because the aisle was too narrow for the wheelchair. The shopkeeper seized the chair and started pushing Rosie out of the door and down the huge step without tilting the chair back. Denise just managed to grab the chair and Rosie?s hair before she hit her face on the pavement.

"?Nowadays I'?d have that shopkeeper in court,"? says Rosie, who runs her own disability issues consultancy, training in disability equality and best practice. Things aren't perfect, even now, she says, but attitudes have improved a great deal. Shopping is no longer a minefield, although it can be interesting.

"?I was in Asda once and felt this tickling sensation. I looked down and this little girl was smiling up at me with her hand up my sleeve. She was trying to find my arm."? Rosie didn?t mind. Children need their questions answered, she says, "?and they often ask the questions adults would like to ask. For instance: "?Can you pick your nose?" Yes; "?How do you eat" I can feed myself but I need the food cut up."

Rosie has a personal assistant who comes each morning to help. At other times, Stephen is there. But James learnt early to keep his toys tidy - a wheelchair over a toy is not good for the toy. Otherwise, he lives quite a normal life.

The idea that he should be involved in his parents? care fills Rosie with horror. "?My worst nightmare,"? she says. ?"Never, that is not something he should ever have to do."? James is Rosie?s pride and joy.

After three miscarriages she had begun to wonder whether she?'d suffered internal damage, as was the case with some thalidomiders.

Longer-term health implications are not clear; of the 500 thalidomiders born in this country, some ten per cent have died before the age of 50 - two of them Rosie?'s friends.

While their deaths probably weren'?t directly attributable to thalidomide, she says they may have been indirectly related. It is easy to forget, for instance, the difficulty of quickly inserting an emergency drip in someone who has no limbs.

Rosie is, naturally, very cautious about all things medical: "?I try to avoid doctors, hospitals and especially medication - though I have to take some, of course."

She reads all the small print, and while pregnant with James wouldn?'t take anything beyond a couple of paracetamol, even refusing gas during labour. "?I wasn?t taking any chances,"? she says.

Fortunately, James arrived with everything intact. Stephen, a solicitor, worked from home two days a week so he could lend a hand, and they employed a mother'?s help for the other three days (paying her themselves, not relying on social services).

Rosie had to be inventive - using her teeth to lift James ?"with a mouthful of Babygro?", and holding a long spoon (two baby spoons Sellotaped together) to feed him. She could change a nappy in an emergency.

Stephen and Rosie are determined to make the most of their lives and give James as normal an upbringing as possible - and they seem to be succeeding on both fronts. But there is no denying that it is hard, which is why they view the return of thalidomide with trepidation. Their fears are not idle. In Brazil - where the drug is used to alleviate the side-effects of leprosy treatment - 33 thalidomiders were born between 1969 and 1995. There were precautions in place to prevent pregnant women taking the drug, but ?drugs leak into the general population,? says Dr Claus Newman of the Thalidomide Trust.

"?If a medicine seems to work then it will be passed from person to person, especially in a huge and relatively under-educated population such as Brazil?s, and the warnings may not go with it."

Dr Newman adds: "Thalidomide is an unforgiving substance. It only requires one tablet to be taken in the most sensitive period [20-36 days after conception] to almost guarantee damage to the baby."

The Pharmion Risk Management Programme - aimed at preventing any unborn child coming into contact with Thalidomide - requires women of child-bearing age to use two forms of contraception and have a pregnancy test every four weeks while on treatment.

As the drug has been found in semen, men must also use a condom during and for four weeks after treatment. Doctors prescribing thalidomide and pharmacies dispensing it, have to be registered with the drug company and patients are provided with material about the dangers of thalidomide - including an interview with a thalidomidedamaged person - before they can sign that they understand the risks.

?If the scheme is rigidly and skillfully enforced, it should indeed minimise the risks,? says Dr Newman, ?but you can?t legislate for human folly or ignorance.?

The current licence application is for the treatment of multiple myeloma. Most MM patients are over 65 and the majority are men, but Rosie fears that if a licence is granted for one disease, others will soon follow.

Researchers are looking at thalidomide for a wide range of immune system diseases, cancers and AIDS-related disorders.

Furthermore, Pharmion is not the only producer of the drug. Others are making it and selling it - sometimes via the internet - with no safety procedures in place.

Rosie would prefer to see the drug continue to be used on the present, closely supervised, "?named patient" basis, rather than it receiving a standard licence. ?"I would love to see this drug that has done so much harm, do some good,?" she says. "?But I can'?t help seeing it as an accident waiting to happen.?"

Four Fingers And Thirteen Toes by Rosaleen Moriarty-Simmonds (La Fontaine Media, &pound;11.95) available from bookstores or rms-bookorders@dsl.pipex.com (plus &pound;2.20 p and p).

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

