TITLE	Health warning over folic acid in bread

Last updated at 23:22 30 October 2007

Putting folic acid in bread may have harmful consequences for health, researchers warned today.

The Food Standards Agency has agreed plans that would require folic acid to be added to flour in an attempt to reduce birth defects. A decision on whether to go ahead with the scheme rests with ministers.

But Institute of Food Research (IFR) scientists found the body might struggle to break down folic acid in the amounts proposed.

The paper, published in the British Journal of Nutrition, found folic acid is broken down by the liver, whereas natural forms of the acid - known as folates - are broken down in the stomach. Folates are found in leafy green vegetables.

The authors warned that a liver flooded with folic acid will release it into the blood undigested. Excess levels of folic acid in the blood have been linked to bowel and breast cancer.

The scientists said the full impact of putting folic acid in food could only become apparent in 20 years' time.

Dr Sian Astley from the IFR said: "Fortifying UK flour with folic acid would reduce the incidence of neural tube defects.

"However, with doses of half the amount being proposed for fortification in the UK, the liver becomes saturated and unmetabolised folic acid floats around the blood stream.

"This can cause problems for people being treated for leukaemia and arthritis, women being treated for ectopic pregnancies, men with a family history of bowel cancer, people with blocked arteries being treated with a stent and elderly people with poor vitamin B status."

She said it also increased the likelihood of multiple births for women undergoing IVF treatment.

The FSA found fortifying bread with folic acid is the best way of reducing cases of birth defects such as spina bifida.

Adding folic acid means fewer mothers will have vitamin B deficiencies during pregnancy, the agency said in May. Between 700 and 900 pregnancies every year in the UK are affected by neural tube defects.

A spokeswoman for the agency said its expert board found there was not enough research on problems with folic acid to assess the potential risk.

She said: "To reduce any potential risks of consuming high levels of folic acid, the recommendation to introduce mandatory fortification was made with the condition that there are controls on voluntary fortification and clear guidance on the appropriate use of supplements containing folic acid."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

