TITLE	Foot-and-mouth pyres lead to milk fears

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Milk and dairy products may be tainted by cancer-causing chemicals from foot-and-mouth pyres, Government experts warned yesterday.

Scientists fear smoke from the infernos carried dioxins on to pasture grazed by dairy cattle.

Dioxins have been linked to illnesses including cancer and diabetes, as well as behavioural problems in children.

The Food Standards Agency, which issued the warning, stressed that there was no evidence yet of a dioxin build-up, and that only a very few people would be at risk in any case.

But there were fears that the warning may prompt consumers to boycott milk, with potentially disastrous results for both public health and the embattled industry.

A drop in milk sales could be the final blowfor many farmers already reeling from the disasters of BSE and foot-and-mouth.

Cutting out milk could have particular health implications for babies and children who benefit from the calcium and protein it contains.

Only milk and milk products which come directly from herds grazing within a mile and a quarter of pyres are under suspicion.

Dioxins are most likely to be prevalent in fatty products such as whole milk, cream, soft cheese and yoghurt.

The FSA has yet to see the results of tests for dioxins in affected areas, but chairman Sir John Krebs said it was following a policy of openness, in contrast to previous official silences over health threats.

The agency advised those most likely to be at risk - mostly farm families and people who buy direct from farms - that they could switch to low-fat alternatives like skimmed or semi-skimmed milk.

Most milk drunk in the UK is produced by large dairies which combine the milk from a variety of herds, so dioxins from any farm at risk would be massively diluted.

Any dioxins released from pyres would have come mainly from the chemically-treated railway sleepers used to accelerate many of the fires.

Fuel and other materials used to burn carcasses may also have released dioxins.

Testing for dioxins began three weeks ago at farms within two kilometres (1.24miles) of pyres - the area in which ash mostly settles.

Samples have been collected from sites in Devon, South and North Wales, Dumfries and Galloway and Cumbria, but the results will not be known until the end of next month.

The FSA has written to half the country's 30,000 dairy farms, although only some 900 in potential risk areas are affected by the agency's advice to alert their customers. Sheep milk products could also be affected.

In the past, Government agencies have tended not to issue warnings until there was firm evidence of a risk. But that led to cover-up allegations over both BSE and foot-and-mouth.

Sir John said: 'Traditionally, what Government has done is keep people in the dark until there is a problem.

'We thought if we said nothing until the end of June and it turned out the levels of dioxins were higher than expected, people would begin to ask us when we started asking these questions. 'We think that is a bigger risk than saying what is actually happening and allowing people to make their own choices.

'We realise that there is a risk people may over-react but our approach is that people have a right to know what we know and when we know it.'

The timing of the warning is also due to the fact that thousands of dairy herds have recently been turned out to summer pastures.

But Sir John stressed: 'This is highly precautionary advice for a very small number of consumers. We are saying it is unlikely there will be a risk from milk, but that we cannot be absolutely sure until we have completed our tests.'

He added that dioxins are harmful only after exposure spanning many years, rather than a few weeks.

Charles Secrett, executive director of Friends of the Earth, said the agency's advice was a welcome sign of openness.

He said: 'Congratulations to the FSA for beginning to live up to its promise to be an independent food safety body - but it is yet more worrying news for farmers and families in foot-and-mouth areas.

'The Government must give a full account of its handling of the foot-and-mouth crisis to a public inquiry.

'We need to know why the Agriculture Ministry did not follow Environment Agency recommendations on the safe disposal of carcasses.'

Mr Secrett said the safest methods were rendering, burning in licensed incinerators and using landfills.

The milk warning came as officials tried to ease concerns that water supplies near foot-and-mouth burial sites could be contaminated with BSE.

Professor Peter Smith, chairman of the Government's Spongiform Encephalopathy Advisory Committee, said any increased risks were likely to be 'very small' and associated with drinking water over a long period.

The Department of Health said risk assessments would be undertaken at burial sites.

The chance of a person contracting vCJD from water contaminated by buried ash is estimated to be one in a million. That increases sixfold where carcasses are buried.

Up to 10,000 of the culled animals are believed to have been over five years old, the category of the highest BSE risk.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

