TITLE	Being fat triggers one in 20 cancers in older women, study finds

By JENNY HOPE

Last updated at 00:11 07 November 2007

Being overweight is the trigger behind at least 6,000 cases of cancer in older women each year, a study has found.

Two-thirds involve womb or breast cancer.

Researchers say excessive weight is linked to a significant increase in the risk of cancer for ten out of 17 types of the disease.

This could mean being fat causes one in 20 out of 120,000 cases of cancer each year among post-menopausal women.

Scroll down for more...

Excessive weight increases risk for ten out of 17 cancer types

The findings from the study by Cancer Research UK follow warnings about the hidden dangers of obesity in a report from the World Cancer Research Fund last week.

That found there was 'convincing' evidence that being overweight can cause six types of common cancer.

The latest research, which looked at factors behind around 45,000 cases of cancer and 17,000 cancer deaths occurring in more than a million women, is published by the British Medical Journal.

The women's weight and height - which was used by researchers to establish their fatness level - was self-reported by those taking part.

The women, aged between 50 and 64, were followed up on average for five years to check whether cancer was diagnosed, and seven years for death rates.

Around 23 per cent of women in the UK are obese and a third are overweight.

Chief researcher Dr Gillian Reeves, from Oxford University, said: "Based on our findings, we estimate that being overweight or obese accounts for around 6,000 out of a total 120,000 new cases of cancer each year among middle-aged and older women in the UK.

"Our research also shows that being overweight has a much bigger impact on the risk of some cancers than others.

"Two-thirds of the additional 6,000 cancers each year due to excess weight or obesity would be cancers of the womb or breast."

Half of all womb lining cancers and cases of one type of oesophagus cancer in this group of women were caused by excess weight, said the scientists.

The researchers matched Body Mass Index against cancer incidence to identify the risk from being overweight. Under World Health Organisation guidelines, a BMI of 18.5 to 24.9 is considered 'normal', overweight is up to 29.9 and clinical obesity is defined as a BMI of 30 or above.

The research showed the relationship between BMI and cancer risk depended on a woman's stage in life.

Being overweight increased the risk of breast cancer only after the menopause.

It also raised the risk of kidney cancer, leukaemia, multiple myeloma, pancreatic cancer, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and ovarian cancer.

Sara Hiom, director of health information at Cancer Research UK, said "This research adds to the evidence regarding the impact of being overweight or obese on developing cancer and dying from the disease.

"While most people readily associate carrying extra weight with being a general health risk, many do not make a specific link with cancer.

"These findings need to be taken into consideration alongside the established strong relationships between body fatness and other common illnesses such as diabetes and heart attacks."

More than 44,000 cases of breast cancer and more than 6,000 cases of cancer of the womb lining are diagnosed in the UK each year.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

