TITLE	Cancer victim DJ told surgeons: 'If my kidney is too far gone don't wake me up!'

By MOIRA PETTY

Last updated at 20:42 19 November 2007

When James Whale's surgeon told him he had the biggest kidney tumour he had ever seen, the original "shock jock" went into, well, shock.

He became convinced he would die during the surgery to remove it and spent the week between his diagnosis and the operation saying goodbye to his loved ones.

Scroll down for more ...

In tune: James Whale and wife Melinda now make the most of the present

Each kidney is normally the size of a baking potato, but the cancer had caused James's left kidney to expand to the size of a watermelon.

"The surgeon said he would need to make a huge incision from my armpit to my groin and wouldn't know if the kidney was attached to any other organs until he'd had a look inside," says James.

"I was told it was a massive operation but it was my only hope - otherwise the chances were I'd be dead within a year or two."

The night before surgery, James made a startling plea to his doctor.

"I said if it was really bad when they opened me up and if nothing more could be done for me, I would rather never wake up."

It was extraordinary to James, then 48, that his health had reached such a dramatic stage so suddenly.

The risk factors for kidney (renal) cancer are smoking (linked to 30 per cent of cases) and exposure to other chemicals such as asbestos and solvents; obesity which can upset the hormonal balance, especially in women; existing kidney inflammation and other kidney diseases.

On rare occasions, a faulty gene is to blame.

"I'd never smoked, drank only the occasional glass or two of wine and was sporty in an outdoorsy, walking-the-dogs kind of way," says James.

"I'd never had anything wrong with me before."

Kidney cancer accounts for three per cent of cancers in men and two per cent in women.

More than 6,000 new cases are diagnosed a year, with a similar number of deaths annually.

Many kidney cancers go undetected because symptoms show up late. It is often found accidentally when a patient is being scanned for another reason.

In 40 per cent of patients - like James - the cancer is confined within the kidney and can be treated surgically. But in 60 per cent, it has spread and cannot be cured.

With hindsight, James, now 56, can pinpoint when the cancer first began to affect his health.

Although he lived in Harrogate with his wife Melinda, James spent part of his week in London where he hosted his controversial late-night radio show on talkSPORT.

After signing off after his Friday night show, he would drive for four hours to his home in Yorkshire, where he owns a restaurant.

"I began to feel tired during the drive," he says. "It was soon normal for me to sleep in the motorway service station for half-an-hour. I put it down to working too hard."

This went on for more than six months but, says James: "I didn't have a clue there was anything wrong. I decided I shouldn't overexert myself.

"My wife then complained that if I took it any easier I'd come to a standstill."

But in late 2000, James discovered blood in his urine. This is often the first symptom of kidney cancer and may be intermittent as the tumour bleeds on and off.

"I drank loads of water and put it down to a urine infection, as my urine appeared to go back to normal," he says.

Several weeks later, after there was more blood, he went to a drop-in medical centre by Waterloo Station and was given a urine test.

"The doctor rang the next day and said I needed to go to hospital immediately.

"Like many men, hospitals made me apprehensive. I didn't want to go in case there was something really wrong."

He finally saw his GP in Yorkshire a week later, who suspected kidney stones, but wanted a urologist to check.

"I had been planning to cancel my medical insurance, which I'd had for 20 years without making a claim," says James.

"Thank goodness I hadn't, because I doubt I'd have seen a specialist three days later on the NHS, and I might not be alive now."

He was referred to Tim O'Brien, a consultant urological surgeon at Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, who saw him five weeks after he had first noticed the blood.

Mr O'Brien first ruled out any obstruction in the bladder. James then had an endoscopy - where a fibre optic tube with a camera is inserted into the bladder - but this was clear.

He also underwent other tests. During the two-day wait for his results, he managed to convince himself he had nothing worse than kidney stones.

"Upon returning, Mr O'Brien told me it was the biggest tumour of the kidney he had ever seen.

"I panicked and said: 'Shall I cancel everything immediately?' Then I said something facile like: 'I can't afford to lose any more hair.' "

James needn't have been concerned about his hair though - kidney tumours don't respond well to chemotherapy. If the cancer is contained within the kidney, surgery is the preferred treatment.

"I wanted to know how long I had to live, but Mr O'Brien couldn't say any more until I'd had a CT scan to see if the cancer had spread."

After the scan, James phoned Melinda, now 58, to tell her that the surgeon wanted to see them both two days later.

When they returned, they were told it was good news - the cancer had not spread.

The tumour had probably been growing for two or three years. The CT scan picks up cancers the size of a marble, but not those the size of a grain of sand.

Mr O'Brien explained that only time would tell if there were any more of these "grains of sand".

"I was given a 50/50 chance of surviving long term," says James.

Surgery was set for ten days' time and the couple went to Brighton for the weekend where they booked themselves into the most expensive suite in the best hotel they could find.

"Mel was elated, saying: 'Yesterday we had no hope. Now we know you can have surgery.' "

James and Melinda have two sons, James, 37, a tree surgeon, and Peter, 36, who runs the Harrogate restaurant.

"My sons stayed strong when we told them," says James. "But Mel said later that when they saw me after the operation, they had to leave the room and cry.

"That week before the op, I went round seeing all the people I cared for, breaking the news to them."

Former newspaper editor Kelvin MacKenzie, then boss of talkSPORT radio, rang James. "He said: 'What's all this about cancer?' Then he added in a quiet voice: 'Don't worry about money. I'll pay you. I look after the people I like,'" recalls James.

On what would be his last show for nearly two months, James revealed all to his audience. "It was very therapeutic - the surge of energy from my listeners bucked me up."

The operation took six hours and both kidney and tumour were successfully removed, leaving James with his remaining healthy kidney - the body can function perfectly well with just one.

He was left with a scar that runs from his armpit to his groin.

"I was in pain for several weeks at home because the painkillers weren't as strong as those I'd had in hospital," he says.

Six weeks later, he went back on air once a week, gradually building up to his former schedule.

James had a check-up every three months for the first year, twice in the second year and annually until this year. Seven years on, he is considered cured.

"It's changed my life. I live for the day. I do drink more than I used to because I don't care about the risks.

"I also make sure I spend time with my family and close friends."

James believes his cancer has given his marriage a second chance, too. He had been unfaithful over the years, and in 1997 one woman sold her story.

"I always loved my wife despite my indiscretions, but now I love Mel more than ever," he says.

Last year, he set up the James Whale Fund For Kidney Cancer to raise money for research into the disease.

His surgeon is a trustee. The two have become friends, cemented by a common purpose - and a shared sense of humour.

"On our first dinner together, he surveyed the menu and smiled," says James.

"Then he said: 'I'll have the devilled kidneys.'"

? ALMOST A CELEBRITY by James Whale (Michael O'Mara Books, &pound;18.99). Visit www.jameswhalefund.org for information on the research fund.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

