TITLE	City life blamed for higher risk of breast cancer

By DAVID DERBYSHIRE

Last updated at 08:20 27 November 2007

The stresses and strains of city life could be putting women at risk of breast cancer, researchers said yesterday.

A study has found that women living in urban areas are 'significantly' more susceptible to the disease than those living in the countryside.

Researchers who made the discovery suspect that city women are more likely to have stressful jobs and are more physically active.

Stress can double the chances of developing breast cancer, while being thin increases the risk of the disease in the years leading up to the menopause.

Dr Nicholas Perry, a radiologist at the Princess Grace Hospital in London, who led the study, said: "Women living in cities need to pay more attention to having regular breast screening.

"Women who live in urban areas are known to have lower attendance for breast-screening programmes-than women in outlying areas.

The researchers studied the mammograms of 972 women taking part in a breast- screening programme and compared the physical make-up of their breasts with their addresses.

Breasts are made from fatty and more fibrous glandular tissue. Fatty tissue - which appears transparent in a mammogram - is relatively light while glandular tissue is dense and appears white in a breast scan.

Past studies have shown that women with more glandular breasts are up to four times as likely to develop breast cancer than women of the same age with fatty breasts.

The latest study found that women living in London had the densest breasts, particularly around the time of the menopause. The breasts of those aged 45 to 54 were twice as dense if they lived in London.

Breast density decreased in line with distance from the urban centre, becoming progressively less pronounced in suburban and rural areas.

Stephen Duffy, Cancer Research UK's professor of screening, a coauthor of the research, believes that obesity could explain the difference between urban and rural women.

"We do not yet know why this is, but it may simply be related to weight," he said.

"The Health Survey for England found that women living in London were the thinnest in the country, and breast density is known to be inversely related to body weight."

Alcohol, number of children and stress could also play a role, he said.

Women in cities are also exposed to traffic pollution which can mimic the sex hormones and stimulate breast tissue, causing it to become denser, the scientists say.

Professor Kefah Mokbel, a member of the team which reported the findings in Chicago yesterday, said:

"Women who live or work in cities should pay greater attention to breast screening. Uptake of breast screening is lower cities like London than in the countryside.

"The other implication is that we have to focus on better traffic management and find ways to reduce traffic emissions."

Breast cancer is more common in women who drink, have never breastfed, eat a high-fat diet, have a family history of the disease, take hormone replacement therapy and who delay having children.

Age is also one of the most important risk factors.

One in nine women will get the disease in their lifetime.

The density of breasts varies enormously from woman to woman and is strongly linked to family history. After the menopause, the proportion of fatty tissue increases and most women's breasts become less dense.

The NHS offers women threeyearly breast scans between the ages of 50 and 70.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

