TITLE	Will giving up wheat help my son's autism?

By JANE CLARKE

Last updated at 11:20 04 December 2007

Every Tuesday, Britain's leading nutritionist explains how to eat your way to health. This week she looks at the effect of diet can have on autism and the possible link between eating grapefruit and breast cancer...

My five-year-old son has autism and is on the NHS waiting list to see a dietician. I have read suggestions that a gluten and dairy-free diet can have a marked effect on behaviour, but my son's paediatrician would prefer he remains on a balanced diet. What do you advise? Lindsay Staples, Plymouth, Devon

Jane says... This is an area that particularly interests me as I have had encouraging results when treating children with autism in my practice.

Scroll down for more... 

The theory behind this diet is that some people with autism cannot properly digest gluten (a protein found in wheat) and casein (a protein in milk) and as a result these form substances that act like opiates. According to the theory, these drug-like substances alter the person's behaviour, perceptions and responses to his environment.

Research in America and Europe has found substances with opiate activity in the urine of some children with autism. Some parents, doctors and researchers have found that removing gluten and casein has led to mild to dramatic improvement in speech and/or behaviour. Some also report that children have experienced fewer bouts of diarrhoea and loose stools since starting a gluten-free, casein-free (GFCF) diet.

But as I have also found, some children experience no benefits whatsoever from the GFCF diet and this is why your paediatrician is, understandably, concerned.

Indeed, the evidence about any link between wheat and dairy intolerance and autism is by no means clear - that's partly because we don't know what causes autism in the first place but also because there can be a large variation in the people's experience of the condition.

The diagnosis of autism is often referred to as autism spectrum disorder; while all people with autism share three main areas of difficulty - social communication, social interaction and social imagination - their condition will affect them in different ways.

Some are able to live relatively normal everyday lives, while others. Some are able to live relatively normal everyday lives, while others will require a lifetime of specialist support.

But not only is the research not conclusive, the diet is hard and can be expensive to follow if you try to cut out both large food groups. It is certainly easier nowadays than ten years ago, when there were few milk-free or glutenfree products that tasted decent.

Still, the benefits may not justify the difficulties involved in getting it right.

Gluten and gluten-like proteins are found in wheat and other grains, including oats, rye, barley, bulgar, durum, kamut and spelt, and foods made from those grains, such as bread.

They are also found in starches such as semolina, couscous, malt, some vinegars, soy sauce, flavourings, artificial colours and hydrolysed vegetable proteins.

Casein is found in milk, cheese, butter, yoghurt, ice-cream, whey and some brands of margarine. It may also be added to non-milk products such as pies and sausages in the form of caseinate, so check labels. In other words, both proteins are extremely difficult to avoid.

However, one suggestion might be to start by cutting out one food group at a time. And give the milk or casein-free diet a try for a few months, then see if you can draw any conclusions before possibly trying to cut out gluten, too.

But I am reluctant to suggest you try this without support from a dietician - it is crucial that children get a nutritionally balanced diet.

It would be easy not to give them enough calcium (which would cause problems with their bones) if you were to cut out dairy and didn't get enough alternative sources of this mineral into their diet. Cutting out gluten takes out a big chunk of everyday foods, such as bread, pasta and cereals.

This can be socially awkward - going out for meals, visiting other people's houses and having school meals become more difficult.

We also all need some starch in our diet for energy. OK, you can get it from gluten-free versions of these foods, but they're not as easy to get hold of. I suspect this is why your paediatrician wants you to see a dietician for individual support and advice.

Coping with autism isn't easy and I would hate for you to get bogged down and stressed out by having such a difficult diet to follow on top of everything else.

But if you persevere, try to give the GFCF diet a good six months' trial before you draw any conclusions.

I read that grapefruit can increase a woman's risk of breast cancer, but does it affect men? As a male who eats half a grapefruit every morning, should I be cutting down? David McConnell, Coventry

A recent American study which looked at 50,000 postmenopausal women found that the risk of developing breast cancer was 30 per cent higher among those who ate just a quarter of a grapefruit daily compared to those who didn't eat it at all.

However, this is just one study, and though it's a large one, it shouldn't stop you or anyone else eating grapefruit. A lot more research is needed before we draw such dramatic conclusions.

The reason grapefruit has been singled out is because it is thought to boost levels of oestrogen, the female hormone associated with a higher risk of breast cancer. Men also produce the hormone, albeit in small amounts.

Previous studies have shown that a particular molecule is involved in metabolising oestrogen, and grapefruit may inhibit this molecule, so boosting blood oestrogen levels and affecting any hormone-sensitive abnormal cells.

The American researchers found that in women who ate at least a quarter of a grapefruit daily, levels of oestrogen were higher, though no such link was found with grapefruit juice.

What we do know is that there is strong evidence that links drinking alcohol and being overweight.

Oestrogen is partly made in the fat tissues of the body, therefore the more fat you carry, the higher your oestrogen levels, with an increased risk in this disease.

So, I would strongly recommend that we all - men and women - concentrate our efforts on eating a well-balanced diet (including five portions of fruit and vegetables each day, among them grapefruit if you like) exercising, and keeping our alcohol intake down.

In this way, we will also reduce our risk of developing diet-related conditions such as heart disease and other types of cancer.

There's no reason to skip grapefruit, which I think is delicious!

Jane will be joining us for a live webchat on Thursday 29th November at 1pm. Join her at www.dailymail.co.uk/janeclarke or email your questions beforehand to stories@dailymailonline.com

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

