TITLE	Cancer alert: Don't eat, drink or tan too much

Last updated at 10:18 30 November 2007

The lives of millions are at risk from smoking, overeating and too much sunbathing, the Government's cancer czar will warn.

Professor Mike Richards is urging the public to change their lifestyles to lower their risk of getting the disease.

A blueprint for the future of cancer services, to be unveiled by ministers on Monday, will overhaul care for patients on the NHS.

The draft document seen by the Evening Standard admits for the first time that there are serious problems in lifesaving treatments for cancer.

It says people are waiting too long for radiotherapy and chemotherapy but sets out new measures to slash waiting times.

Doctors will be given "essential" orders to increase radiotherapy doses amid evidence that only half the right number of treatments are being delivered.

Pilot programmes to screen 47-year-old women for breast cancer will be announced, cutting the starting age from 50.

Doctors will also be urged to provide more "emotional" support for longterm sufferers who campaigners say are neglected by the system.

The plans will also involve a radical shift in treatment, with far more patients cared for at home instead of in hospital. They call for speedier access to new cancer drugs by examining them for cost-effectiveness at the same time as licences are being decided.

An awareness campaign will target people at increased risk of cancer because of smoking, binge drinking and sunbathing.

There is growing concern about the standard of cancer services in Britain. Major reports have warned that staff shortages and lack of equipment in radiotherapy are leading to long waiting lists and could be cutting the chances of patient survival.

Breast cancer patients are waiting three months for therapy, despite evidence which shows there is a 60 per cent risk of the disease returning if they are not treated within eight weeks.

Dr Michael Williams, vice-president of the Royal College of Radiologists, said: "Treatment is inadequate and needs desperately to improve. We need more staff, more equipment and a national board to make sure these changes actually take place."

The NHS delivers 1.5 million courses of radiotherapy treatment every year, when the ideal would be 2.5 million, according to the Royal College.

Figures show there are 230,000 new cases of cancer a year in England and one in four of all deaths are caused by the disease.

Britain also lags behind other countries in the uptake of new drugs with huge concern over a postcode lottery for cancer treatments. A report published this week by the Conservatives revealed huge inequalities in access to cancer drugs across the country.

Experts today welcomed the reforms but said they would not work without more cash or better managed services. Professor Karol Sikora, one of Britain's leading cancer experts, said:

"We need to provide a far more customer-focused service as close to people's homes as possible. Better organisation and new models of working which involve the independent sector would bring about a revolution for future patients and save lives."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

