TITLE	How green is your cuppa?

by DR JOHN BRIFFA, Daily Mail

With cancer rates increasing sharply in the Western world, it makes sense to do anything we can to reduce our risk.

The World Health Organisation recently declared that up to 70 per cent of cancers are diet-related.

Over the past decade, there has been growing interest in the role of specific foods and drinks in cancer prevention.

One that has received particular attention is green tea - traditionally consumed in China and Japan.

Research published in this month's edition of the International Journal of Cancer shows that drinking green tea halves the risk of a condition known as gastritis (stomach inflammation), believed to precede many cases of stomach cancer.

This latest research supports already existing evidence for green tea's cancer-protective effects. However, benefits do not end there: other studies suggest that drinking green tea may protect against heart and liver disease, too.

Green tea is prepared by drying leaves harvested from the tea plant Camellia sinensis. This is rich in a class of substances known as polyphenols, which have an 'antioxidant' action in the body, helping to quench damaging molecules known as 'free radicals', believed to promote illnesses such as cancer and heart disease.

Green tea differs from black tea - the variety predominantly drunk in the West - in that it is not fermented before drying.

This process appears to reduce polyphenol content by up to 90pc, which is why green tea is believed to offer significant health benefits over black tea.

Green tea's chief antioxidant is a compound known as epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), which appears to have ability to suppress many different elements of the cancer-forming process.

Work published in the medical journal Mutation Research in 1998 found that drinking more than ten cups of green tea a day significantly delayed cancer development, compared with drinking fewer than three cups a day.

In women, cancer onset was delayed more than seven years. Men saw a more modest but still significant delay of more than three years.

To date, there have been more than 30 studies which have examined the effect of consuming green tea on cancer risk.

As with many areas of science, not all of these studies have been positive. However, the balance of evidence does suggest that green tea can help protect against several different forms of cancer, including those affecting the colon, stomach, oesophagus (gullet), bladder and pancreas.

Research published in the British Medical Journal in 1995 also found green tea consumption was associated with lower levels of cholesterol and other unhealthy blood fats known as triglycerides.

Interestingly, green tea consumers also had higher levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol - the 'good' cholesterol associated with a reduced risk of heart disease and stroke.

Other studies published last year in the Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry found green tea extract could protect cholesterol from damaging changes (oxidation) believed to contribute to its tendency to promote blockage of the body's arteries.

Another organ which may benefit from green tea's properties is the liver. Liver function is often assessed with blood tests which measure the levels of substances known as liver enzymes.

The level of one or more of these enzymes is frequently elevated in liver disease. The same research which found an association between green tea and lowered cholesterol, found evidence that green tea might reduce the level of liver enzymes, too.

Although we still have much to learn about the health effects of green tea, there is mounting evidence to suggest that it does have significant health-giving properties.

Although it has been mainly a drink of the East, green tea has recently become widely available in the UK, in many health food stores and supermarkets.

However, green tea contains stimulants such as caffeine and theobromine in similar amounts to black tea. Excessive consumption of these may lead to side-effects such as digestive discom-fort, nervousness and insomnia.

Drinking green tea (or any other caffeinated beverage) is best kept to a level at which these side-effects are not apparent.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

