TITLE	Under-18s face sunbed ban in new crackdown on cancer

By TOM HARPER

Last updated at 22:40 01 December 2007

Gordon Brown is proposing to ban under-18s from using coin-operated sunbeds in an attempt to cut soaring cancer rates.

He also plans to outlaw cigarette machines in pubs and hotels because they can easily be used by children.

The crackdowns are among a raft of public health measures being unveiled by the Prime Minister this week.

Scroll down for more...

Tragic: Zita Farrelly had used a sunbed twice a day for seven years, she died of skin cancer aged 29

He has been warned that children as young as 12 are buying 30p-a-minute tanning sessions in their lunch breaks.

Yet research has found that four out of five sunbeds produce dangerous levels of ultra-violet radiation.

In July, a mother-of-two who had used a sunbed twice a day for seven years died of skin cancer aged 29.

Zita Farrelly, of Salford, Greater Manchester, died three days after her daughter's first birthday.

She had started using sunbeds at 14 and given them up at 21.

The World Health Organisation recently warned that children should not use sunbeds as they are consistently linked to melanoma.

It is the fastest-growing cancer in Britain, with cases soaring by 43 per cent in ten years.

As well as the ban on tobacco machines in pubs and hotels, there may also be further restrictions on cigarette packaging and advertising in shops.

Smoking is the biggest preventable cause of cancer.

Half of smokers die from cancer or other smoking-related illnesses - and a quarter die before reaching middle age.

An extra &pound;130million has also been earmarked for radiotherapy equipment and extra staff as lifestyle cancer cases rise, with Britons risking their health from sunbathing, drinking too much and eating a poor diet.

The Government action forms part of the NHS cancer reform strategy, to be launched by Health Secretary Alan Johnson tomorrow.

Harpal Kumar, chief executive of Cancer Research UK, said: "We are greatly encouraged that further action on sunbeds is being considered.

"But smoking remains the single biggest preventable cause of cancer and the commitment to go further on tobacco control is critical.

"Any new regulations that help people to give up smoking must be welcome."

Shadow Health Secretary Andrew Lansley said: "The Government's cancer plan has not succeeded.

"Cancer survival rates in Britain are among the lowest in Europe, so of course it is right to say that we have to reduce cancer risk through changes to diet and by stopping smoking.

"However, many primary care trusts have cut back the support they offer to people to stop smoking.

"Also, the take-up of cancer drugs in Britain is slower than almost anywhere in Europe.

"We have to make sure that the NHS cancer strategy achieves the early diagnosis and treatment which patients need."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

