TITLE	Save lives, don't dictate lifestyles

Last updated at 22:50 02 December 2007

As the Government launches a five-year plan for improving cancer services, it must confront some stark and damning statistics.

Despite spending more per patient than any other European country, our cancer survival rates are now the lowest in Western Europe and only slightly above the Czech Republic, Slovenia and Poland.

In a league table of 20 countries, Britain comes a lamentable 16th.

For speed of first treatment, availability of radiotherapy, and access to drugs, we also lag behind neighbouring countries.

Survival rates are improving but given the vast resources poured into the NHS since 1997, they are not improving quickly enough.

As in so many areas of the NHS, money is being spent but we are not seeing value. Four million cancer sufferers still wait more than a month for radiotherapy treatment and a three-month delay is not uncommon.

For a disease where speed of treatment is paramount, this is simply not good enough.

The eminent cancer specialist Professor Karol Sikora says the root of the problem is that much of the extra cash has disappeared into the insatiable bureaucracy of the NHS - funding legions of managers to oversee centrally imposed targets.

He said yesterday: "The strategy will be very glossy when it is launched but unless we make the health system more efficient, we'll just end up with more red tape."

Health Secretary Alan Johnson may prefer to focus on public health advice, demanding we all eliminate risk from our diet and lifestyle. But he would do better to take responsibility and mark Professor Sikora's words.

We have some of the best medics in the world but too often they are hindered by the superficial meddling of bureaucrats.

Central to this five-year plan, if it is to succeed, must be a promise to unfetter the professionals and let them get on with their job of saving lives.

LICENSING PROFLIGACY

While the Prime Minister's pledge to bring transparency to the system of political party donations is welcome, there are growing signs that these reforms will be used as an excuse to extend state funding.

We already keep our MPs in a style most working people can only dream of - handsome salaries, vast expenses and gold-plated pensions.

To be forced to bankroll their party structures too would be too much for the taxpayer to bear.

Labour spent &pound;18million on the last General Election alone and currently stands more than &pound;20million in the red.

Like anyone who chooses to live beyond their means, they should simply spend less or face the consequences, rather than have the state foot the bill for their profligacy. The same goes for all parties.

Local Government Secretary Hazel Blears made the breathtaking assertion yesterday that without state funding, episodes like the Abrahams affair were likely to happen "again and again". Why?

This scandal was not brought about by some accident of nature. It involved senior Labour officials colluding in unlawful activity. It would only happen again if more people were prepared to break the law.

Voters should continue to choose which party they support and decide for themselves whether to express that support through financial donation.

With trust in politicians at an all-time low, it would be particularly offensive to make them pay tens of millions from the public purse to fund campaigns by parties they do not support, aimed at denigrating the party they do.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

