TITLE	Chemical produced by cooking food doubles risk of cancer in women

Last updated at 09:56 03 December 2007

A chemical produced by frying, roasting or grilling food can double the risk of cancer in women, a new study has revealed.

Five years ago, scientists sparked a worldwide alert when they disclosed that many household foods contain the substance acrylamide, which was thought to be a possible cause of the disease.

Now a study involving 62,000 women has established a direct link between consumption of the chemical and the incidence of ovarian and womb cancer.

Research has shown that acrylamide is found in cooked foods such as bread, breakfast, cereals, coffee and also meat and potatoes which have been fried, baked, roasted, grilled or barbecued.

The Dutch study found that women who absorbed more acrylamide were twice as likely to develop ovarian or womb cancer as those who ate a smaller amount.

The higher amount eaten by the women was equivalent to a single packet of crisps, half a packet of biscuits, or a portion of chips a day.

The EU has now advised people to avoid burnt toast or golden brown chips because they contain higher levels of the substance.

They have also recommended eating home-cooked meals which contain much lower amounts of the chemical than processed products, fast food and restaurant meals.

About 6,400 women are diagnosed with womb cancer each year in Britain, and 7,000 with ovarian cancer, one of the highest rates in Europe.

The study comes as the Government launches a five-year strategy to combat cancer. The UK is near the bottom of the European cancer survival league - despite ministers' pledge seven years ago to bring us up to the top.

Survival rates are on a par with countries such as Poland, Slovenia and the Czech Republic, even though health spending is three times as high as in Eastern Europe.

The Food Standards Agency welcomed the report into acrylamide and called on consumers to heed the EU's advice. But a spokesman said it was not possible to avoid the chemical entirely.

'This new study supports our current advice and policy, which already assumes that acrylamide has the potential to be a human carcinogen,' he said.

'Since acrylamide forms naturally in a wide variety of cooked foods, it is not possible to have a healthy balanced diet that avoids it.'

The findings from the University of Maastricht, published in the journal Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and Prevention came only a month after the public was warned about the increased risk of cancer from eating bacon and ham.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

