TITLE	The cooking oils that make you healthy - and those that don't

By MANDY FRANCIS

Last updated at 16:32 04 December 2007

Yet another piece of research has confirmed the benefits of omega 3 oils. As well as lowering the risk of heart disease and stroke, increasing concentration and helping those suffering from inflammatory conditions, such as rheumatoid arthritis, they may also help prevent Alzheimer's, according to a new American study.

However not all omegas appear to be quite as good for you, regarding dementia.

The researchers also found 'overdosing' on oils rich in omega 6, such as sunflower oil - (omega 6 fats are known to be helpful for keeping blood cholesterol levels down) - could have the reverse effect, possibly doubling the risk of developing dementia.

Omega 3 and 6 belong to the polyunsaturated group of fats, with the other two main types being the monounsaturated and saturated families.

Vegetable oils all contain varying amounts of these types of fat but are generally dominated by one. For example, rapeseed is predominantly a monounsaturated fat; sunflower oil is mainly a polyunsaturated fat and palm oil is largely saturated fat.

Any type of oil or fat will help the body absorb fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E and K), and make sex hormones. But moderating intake of fat in general, and some types in particular, is important for health.

When saturated fats are eaten to excess, they can raise blood cholesterol levels and increase the risk of heart disease. Moderate amounts of monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats are beneficial as they lower blood cholesterol.

Polyunsaturated fats help cell membranes remain flexible and porous, allowing nutrients to enter and waste products to leave. But the amount and balance of polyunsaturated fats we eat is important, too.

The trend is for us to eat too high a proportion of omega 6 polyunsaturates (found in many vegetable oils, chicken and processed foods) and not enough omega 3 polyunsaturates (found in oily fish, some nuts, seeds and a select few vegetable oils).

Government recommendations suggest a ratio of 5 to 1 for omega 6 and omega 3 fats respectively. Current intake is about 10-20 to 1, which research is beginning to suggest may be increasing our risk of cancer and inflammatory conditions, and, according to the latest research, possibly Alzheimer's.

The general advice is that fats and oils should make up no more than about 33 per cent of our daily calorie intake. For men, that's 95g, for women 70g. In terms of oil, it's 7 tablespoons for a man, 5 for a woman.

With this warning in mind, and the myriad confusing oils in the supermarket, which ones should we be eating more of - and which should we be keeping a close eye on?

Olive oil has been linked to lower risk of heart disease and breast cancer - possibly because of its high monounsaturated fat content, which lowers cholesterol. Extra virgin oil is rich in natural plant antioxidants that can protect us against damaging free radicals. Cons: Reasonably high in saturated fat (two tablespoons provide a fifth of a woman's daily limit) - so don't go overboard. Suitable for European dishes. Not a good source of omega 3s. Rating: 8/10

A much richer source of omega 3 than any other oil, and a great choice for vegetarians, particularly the strict type who need to get omega 3 solely from plant foods. Regular use of linseed oil may help lower cholesterol. Cons: Unsuitable for cooking. It can become oxidised (rancid) if you don't keep it in a cool, dark place, and if this happens the benefits are negated and possibly reversed. There's no need to buy something so expensive ? rapeseed oil will do. Rating: 7/10

A good source of both polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fat - rapeseed has the lowest saturated fat of any oil and ten times as much omega 3 as olive oil. It can be heated to high temperatures without degrading. Cons: None really, although its bland flavour makes it less suitable for salad dressing and dipping. Rating: 9/10

Contains vitamin E and carotenes - which have been shown to help protect the body from free-radical damage. Cons: Palm kernel oil is 85 per cent saturated fat, which means a woman will get more than her daily quota of cholesterol-raising saturated fat in two tablespoons. The demand for palm oil plantations is driving rainforest destruction worldwide. Rating: 2/10

This is even higher in monounsaturates - the key fat in a healthy Mediterranean diet - than olive oil. Plus it's a good source of vitamin E. Its slightly nutty flavour makes it good for drizzling, dipping and dressings. Also has a higher smoking point than many oils, so can be used to grill, saut&eacute; or stir-fry. Cons: Expensive and hard to find - its delicious flavour can make it easy to over-indulge. Virtually devoid of omega 3s. Rating: 7/10

Relatively inexpensive. Sunflower is a good source of protective antioxidant vitamin E - it contains all of your daily requirement in 1-2 tablespoons - and the polyunsaturates it contains help lower cholesterol. It's a suitable oil for frying: it doesn't smoke unpleasantly at high temperatures. Cons It's largely omega 6 polyunsaturates, so if you use sunflower oil regularly, you need to be sure you're getting enough omega 3s in your diet from other sources to balance it out. Re-using the oil more than a few times for deep-frying could cause the formation of harmful trans fats. Rating: 6/10

Very low in saturated fat with a good balance of monoand polyunsaturated fats, including the omega 3 type, but less than other specialist oils like hemp and flaxseed. It will stand up to some heating (delicious for roasting vegetables), and its distinctive dark green colour looks great drizzled over food. Cons: Expensive - and available only from specialist shops. The oil doesn't contain the same high levels of zinc, iron or magnesium that the seeds themselves are famed for. Rating: 5/10

A mainly monounsaturated fat, walnut oil also provides some omega 3s, but no more than rapeseed oil. Because of its powerful flavour, only a drizzle is needed to flavour food and salad dressings, which makes it easier to save on fat grams and calories. Cons: Expensive. Also, its flavour degrades at high temperatures, so not suitable for cooking. Once opened, it deteriorates rapidly, so keep only in small quantities and store in a cool, dark cupboard. Rating: 4/10

 For further information on fats in the diet: www.thefatpanel.org.uk

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

