TITLE	Hairdresser dies from asbestos after working in a salon for 33 years

Last updated at 11:31 04 December 2007

A hairdresser died from exposure to asbestos after working in a hair salon for 33 years, an inquest has heard.

In what is thought to be the first cancer case in the UK with a possible link to hair salon equipment, 60-year-old Carol Heaton died after contracting malignant mesothelioma.

The Sheffield inquest heard that the Health and Safety Laboratory has already tested emissions from heating elements in hair salons which used to be insulated with asbestos and concluded there was "no appreciable risk."

But Mrs Heaton somehow developed the killer disease in which cancer cells are found in the sac lining the chest.

The majority of victims contract the disease by breathing in asbestos through their work. But a medical expert on asbestos-related diseases told the Sheffield hearing he had never come across a case like it.

Mrs Heaton, from Mapplewell, Barnsley had never knowingly been exposed to asbestos but rapidly declined in health after being diagnosed with the disease.

Consultant histopathologist Dr Kim Suvarna said an autopsy revealed the victim had a relatively low level of asbestos fibres in her body but it showed she had been exposed to asbestos.

He said she had no obvious long-term exposure to asbestos in her job such as might be encountered by miners, power station workers, plumbers or electricians.

Dr Suvarna said asbestos was still commonplace in everyday life, particularly in industrial areas. The disease regularly appears in later life after exposure.

Research in the United States has shown no apparent link between mesothelioma and hairdressing.

The doctor told the inquest: "It is more likely that this person would have been exposed to asbestos from some time accidentally rather than a consequence of the occupation."

He said if working in hair salons was a significant factor he would be seeing more cases of women with mesothelioma and a steady trickle of hairdressers.

Dr Suvarna said: "It is the first time I have been given this particular bias.

"On the balance of probabilities it is more likely this is an unfortunate case of asbestos contamination from environmental pollution.

"If you are unfortunate to get a good dose you are at risk of mesothelioma.

"She could have contracted this walking down the street or even from someone doing a bit of do-it-yourself. Asbestos is a very dangerous material."

He said asbestos was present in hair salons on a daily basis but no hairdressers should have Mrs Heaton's degree of lung contamination.

She ran her own hair salon from 1962 to 2006 with a break of just 11 years.

The married victim, a smoker with little medical history, first showed signs of the disease in May, 2005 and then developed breathlessness and chest pains.

Doctors treated her with radiotherapy and chemotherapy but it proved unsuccessful and she died peacefully at home on September 9 this year.

Assistant deputy coroner Donald Coutts-Wood said: "We could all just be walking down the street and breathe in the asbestos fibres and it could be 20 or 30 years later before mesothelioma occurs."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

