TITLE	Fat 'doubles death risk' in breast cancer

By JENNY HOPE

Last updated at 23:19 07 December 2007

Weight gain after being diagnosed with breast cancer could more than double the risk of dying of the disease, researchers say

Women who gain weight after being diagnosed with breast cancer could more than double their risk of dying from the disease, say researchers.

They say the danger is 2.4 times higher for an obese woman than one of normal weight and rises 14 per cent for every extra 11lb.

The data was presented yesterday at the American Assocation for Cancer Research's conference in Philadelphia.

Previous research showed weight gain at any stage can increase the risk of breast cancer by up to one and half times, but did not look at the risk of death.

The new study involved 4,000 patients taking part in research started in 1988 at centres in three American states.

They were surveyed about post-diagnosis weight, weight gain, physical activity and diet.

Researchers at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Boston, identified 121 breast cancer-related deaths.

Using Body Mass Index - a measure of weight and height - the risk of dying from breast cancer was nearly 2.4 times that of women classified as having a normal body weight.

Hazel Nichols, of the Johns Hopkins department of epidemiology, said: "Obesity was associated with risk of death even after accounting for age, menopausal status or smoking.

"Our findings provide additional support for the benefits of maintaining a healthy weight and exercising."

She said it is thought changes in sex hormone levels triggered by weight gain could explain the increased risk of hormone-dependent cancers, such as breast cancer.

The female hormone oestrogen stimulates the growth of some breast cancers.

Although oestrogen is mainly produced by women before the menopause, it is also supplied by fat cells.

Larger stores of body fat therefore affect the amount of hormone a woman has.

There are 41,000 cases of breast cancer in the UK each year, and 13,000 deaths.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

