TITLE	A simple blood test could detect early breast cancer 'by end of 2008'

By JENNY HOPE

Last updated at 08:29 14 December 2007

A simple blood test to detect early breast cancer could be available within months.

It would provide a screening service for younger women at high risk of the disease who are currently given X-ray checks.

Preliminary trials of the blood test show "promising" results, which suggest it may be possible to detect cancer when the tumour is extremely small and there are no symptoms.

It uses a technique called "gene expression analysis" to find a signature or pattern that distinguishes healthy blood from diseased blood or tissue.

Norwegian life sciences company DiaGenic ASA, which is developing the test, is hoping to get it approved for European-wide clinical use by the end of 2008.

Private healthcare provider Opaldia will offer it to private patients, while NHS patients may benefit if doctors believe it has advantages over existing screening methods and is cost-effective.

Opaldia medical director Dr James Mackay said mammograms are mostly used for women at high risk of breast cancer in their 40s.

But they can detect lumps only when they reached a size of between 5mm (0.19in) and 10mm (0.39in), and the density of breast tissue in younger women often makes it difficult to interpret the X-rays.

He said all health professionals who work with breast cancer are concerned that mammograms may not produce the best results in women under 47.

"Therefore a new test used alongside mammography would provide the optimal chance of detecting the cancer as early as possible and the findings are promising."

Research published in Breast Cancer Research involving almost 60 women, half of whom had breast cancer, showed there were distinct blood patterns associated with the disease.

Professor Kefah Mokbel, consultant breast surgeon of the London Breast Institute at the Princess Grace Hospital and St George's Hospital, said the blood test needs to be validated in much bigger trials across different ethnic and age groups.

He added: "It isn't ready for use yet and some tests in the past have failed to get beyond this point in proving reliable and accurate.

"The results so far are interesting and it would be an extremely useful advance, although it would to compared to the gold standard screening tool of X-rays and reduce the chances of dying from breast cancer still further."

Dr Sarah Cant, Head of Policy at Breakthrough Breast Cancer, said: "New ways to improve early detection of breast cancer are to be encouraged, because the earlier the disease is diagnosed and treated, the better the chances of a successful outcome.

"Although we know mammograms can be difficult to interpret in women with dense breast tissue - and this includes younger women - it's important to remember that breast cancer is rare in younger women."

Dr Emma Pennery of Breast Cancer Care said: 'We understand that this new type of blood test would be of particular interest to younger women.

"However, 80 per cent of all breast cancers are diagnosed in those aged 50 and over.

"Any younger women found to be at a high risk of breast cancer, either through significant family history or as a carrier of the BRACA 1 or 2 gene, will receive annual magnetic resonance imaging tests, which are effective in detecting breast cancers in younger women.

"Regardless of age, it is vital that all women remain breast aware by knowing how their breasts look and feel normally, and by reporting any changes direct to their GP."

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

