TITLE	Cancer sufferer may sue over ban on top-up drugs that could prolong her life

By JENNY HOPE

Last updated at 00:09 18 December 2007

A cancer patient could take legal action to make the Health Service treat her with life-prolonging drugs she wants to buy privately.

Health chiefs have told Colette Mills she cannot have the "wonder drug" Avastin on the NHS and have threatened to withdraw her free care if she pays for it.

But a leading barrister said the former nurse, who has breast cancer, had a right to combine state and private treatment.

Scroll down for more ...

Banned: Colette Mills has been stopped from getting a 'wonder drug' on the NHS and has been told she can't pay for it herself if she wants free healthcare

Nigel Giffin QC, a specialist in public health policy, said health authorities trying to prevent patients from making "copayments" were on shaky legal ground.

"There is nothing to stop a patient receiving both private and state treatment for the same condition at the same time providing this is clinically appropriate," he said.

Mrs Mills, 58, offered to meet the &pound;4,000-amonth bill for the drug but was told this would make her liable for the bill for all her care, which would be &pound;15,000 a month.

The mother of two and her husband, an advertising agency boss, are devastated that an extra lifeline has been lost.

She is already being provided with the chemotherapy drug Taxol and would be given Avastin in hospital at the same time to treat the cancer which has spread throughout her body.

She accused South Tees Hospitals NHS Trust of double standards because it had not objected to her paying for a private scan as a "top-up".

Her offer to buy Avastin has been rejected, however, because it is seen as an "add-on".

Mr Giffin said he did not regard the trust's refusal of treatment as legitimate.

"There is no bar in law to a patient buying her own drugs and having them administered as part of a course of NHS treatment," he added.

"If the only reason why the relevant NHS body would otherwise refuse to provide a course of treatment is the cost of the drugs involved, and if the patient is willing and able to take that cost out of the equation, then refusal to provide the treatment would be irrational and unlawful."

The Department of Health says that although co-payment is legal, it contravenes its code of practice and would open the door to a two-tier system.

Mr Giffin said it was questionable whether the code of practice applied in this case.

A spokesman for the Department of Health said: "Allowing co-payments would risk creating a two-tier service, undermining the basic legal obligation that NHS care must be provided free at the point of use, based on clinical need, not ability to pay.

"The issue of whether a trust can mix private and NHS-funded care is addressed directly in guidance.

"A patient cannot be both a private and an NHS patient for the treatment of one condition during a single visit to an NHS organisation.

"But in all other respects, patients who choose to be treated privately are entitled to NHS services on exactly the same basis of clinical need as any other patient."

South Tees health trust said that by paying privately for certain drugs a patient elected to become a private patient for the duration of their treatment.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

