TITLE	Screening halves deaths from breast cancer

By BEN CLERKIN

Last updated at 08:48 09 January 2008

Breast cancer screening has almost halved the number of deaths from the disease, according to a study of women seen on the NHS published today.

The research found that women screened for breast cancer were 48 per cent less likely to die of the disease than women who were not examined.

Previous research has suggested that screening programmes would reduce deaths from breast cancer by between 15 per cent and 35 per cent.

Stephen Duffy, professor of cancer screening with Cancer Research UK, who led the study, said: 'This is the strongest evidence yet that screening programmes like this save lives.

'The results showed that the NHS breast cancer screening programme has been even more effective at saving lives than we predicted.'

Today's research, comparing the screening histories of 300 women in East Anglia who died of breast cancer with 600 women of the same age who were still living, is the first of a series of studies examining the success of the national screening programme.

The study, in the British Journal of Cancer, is published two days after Gordon Brown put his weight behind a range of screening programmes as a means of catching early diseases such as diabetes and heart problems, reducing the patient's need for treatment and saving the NHS money.

The breast cancer screening programme is being extended so that by 2012 all women from age 47 to 73 will get an invitation.

Julietta Patnick, director of NHS cancer screening programmes, said she hoped more women would be encouraged to come for screening.

'It is important we constantly evaluate the effectiveness of the programme and I am delighted that these latest findings show that breast screening can save lives,' she said.

'I hope the study will encourage women to make an informed choice to accept their invitation for screening.'

Sara Hiom, Cancer Research UK's director of health information, said: 'Survival rates for breast cancer have been improving for more than 20 years - eight out of 10 patients now survive more than five years.

'This is partly due to our very effective screening programme. Here is more proof that screening works: our breast, cervical and now also bowel cancer screening programmes are certainly effective.'

However, some cancer experts said the study was not sufficiently robust. There is a danger, they say, that women will hear only about the benefits of screening and not about the small but real risk of being misdiagnosed.

Angela Raffle, a consultant in public health and screening expert based in Bristol, said she would have no hesitation in encouraging women to attend breast screening appointments but warned that case-control studies such as the East Anglia research were not always what they seemed.

'There are many potential biases in case-control studies and experience has shown that they consistently overestimate the benefits of screening compared with proper randomised controlled trials [RCTs],' she said.

The East Anglia study is not an RCT - it is a case-control study, comparing the screening histories of women who had been invited for screening at least once.

Duffy acknowledges the risk of bias - mainly because the women who opt for screening may be more healthy than those who do not - but says the research took that factor into account.

One in every nine women in the UK will develop breast cancer at some point in her life. More than 41,000 cases are diagnosed each year. It has become the most common cancer in the UK, and is the leading cause of death for women aged 34 to 54.

Today, invitations go out to more than 2 million women a year and around 70 per cent to 75 per cent go for screening.

In 2004/5, the last year for which complete figures have been published, 83,000 women were recalled for further tests after screening appeared to show up something suspicious - 4.8 per cent of the total. Nearly 14,000 cancers were detected.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

