TITLE	Black women develop breast cancer two decades earlier than white women

Last updated at 09:51 17 January 2008

Black women develop breast cancer two decades earlier than white women, the first UK study looking at the differences suggests.

Researchers found that black patients were diagnosed with breast cancer aged 46 on average while white patients were diagnosed at an average age of 67.

The study, published online in the British Journal of Cancer, involved 102 black British women and 191 white women diagnosed with breast cancer at Homerton University Hospital in Hackney, East London, between 1994 and 2005.

Researchers, based at the Institute of Cancer and Cancer Research UK clinical centre at Barts and the London, also found that survival was poorer among black women with smaller tumours.

In addition, their early findings suggest that tumours in the younger black patients were more likely to be aggressive, and a higher proportion of tumours were basal-like - meaning they were less likely to respond to newer types of targeted breast cancer treatments like Herceptin.

If these results are confirmed in larger studies, the findings could have implications for diagnosis, screening and treatment of black patients in the future, they said.

Study author Dr Rebecca Bowen, said 25 per cent of all breast cancer cases diagnosed in London during the study period were in women aged 45 or younger.

However, this figure rose to 45 per cent among the black population in Hackney.

"We think the differences in the way tumours of black and white women behave can be put down to the biological differences between the two ethnic groups," she added.

"We're now trying to find out why the tumours are so different so that we can develop new treatments to target the aggressive forms of breast cancer seen in young black women."

The team sought to compare women of broadly similar socio-economic backgrounds to avoid unduly influencing the results.

Until recently, UK cancer registries have not collected ethnicity data routinely, but incidence of breast cancer among black British women is thought to be lower than in the white population.

Dr Bowen said: "It's important that we use the information learnt from this study to raise awareness of breast cancer risk factors and the importance of early detection among the black population."

Dr Lesley Walker, Cancer Research UK's director of cancer information, said: "This is very interesting research.

"The fact that black women are being diagnosed with breast cancer at a much younger age than white women is clearly worrying.

"If these results are confirmed in follow-up studies, it might be appropriate to alter screening services offered to black women to better reflect the age at which they are diagnosed with breast cancer.

"But at the moment it's too early to suggest any changes to the screening programme because the study was so small."

In the UK, women aged between 50 and 70 are offered breast screening every three years.

The programme is gradually being extended to include women aged from 47 and up to 73.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

