TITLE	How DIRT can protect you against cancer

By PAT HAGAN

Last updated at 21:33 21 January 2008

Cleaning obession: Studies suggest that our obsession with cleanliness is bad for us

The idea that we're too clean for our own good will be familiar to many. Scientists call it the hygiene hypothesis, and the theory is that far from benefiting our health, our obsession with cleanliness and hygiene is actually bad for us.

It's said that exposure to dirt and germs early in life 'primes' the immune system so it is prepared for any future threat - and that our constant wiping and sterilising of everything from kitchen work tops to children's toys may be undermining this important mechanism.

Last year, UK consumers spent &pound;610 million on household cleaning products, up 16 per cent over a five-year period, according to market research experts Mintel.

And the result of all this cleaning, according to proponents of the hygiene hypothesis, is an exponential growth in allergies.

The UK has one of the highest rates of allergy in the world - around 6,000 people a year need hospital treatment for potentially life-threatening reactions to animals, bee stings and foods such as peanuts.

Previously, researchers have focused mainly on allergies, asthma and eczema. Numerous studies show children raised on farms are less likely to get these diseases, either because they inhale all kinds of toxins or drink raw milk packed with bugs.

Youngsters raised with cats or dogs also seem to be protected.

But now scientists believe the hygiene hypothesis could also explain the rising incidence of cancer.

Since the mid-Seventies, the number of people in the UK annually diagnosed with cancer has risen by 25 per cent, according to Cancer Research UK.

According to the hygiene hypothesis, repeated exposure to allergens, bacteria or certain toxins keeps the immune system on 'red alert', suppressing cancer cells in the earliest stages of development. Studies suggest that the more germs you get into your body, the less likely you are to get certain tumours.

Scroll down for more...

Kylie Minogue: The singer has recovered after battling breast cancer. The number of people diagnosed with the disease is increasing according to Cancer Research UK

Two years ago, researchers at the University of Padua, Italy, indeed found substantially lower rates of lung cancer in dairy farmers than other agricultural workers.

As far back as the Seventies, it became clear that cotton industry workers were also less at risk of lung cancer than other occupations, according to a New Scientist report.

The secret, researchers believe, is a bacterial endotoxin that contaminates raw cotton and the dust it gives off. This toxin constantly stimulates the immune system to be on guard for abnormalities.

But perhaps the most compelling evidence on how germs can protect us against cancer comes from childhood leukaemia, or cancer of the blood cells.

Some experts think children who attend day care facilities in the first few months of life may gain protection against the disease.

This is because they are exposed to a range of different organisms at a time when the immune system is still developing. With the immune system permanently active, the chances of leukaemia developing may be reduced.

But the timing is crucial. If this encounter with the bacterial 'enemy' happens in the first few weeks of life, the immune system is gently 'prodded' into action.

If it happens a year or more after birth, it triggers an overreaction by the immune system so destructive it sparks the growth of cancer cells.

Research carried out by the Leukaemia Research Fund, in 2005, showed infants exposed to bugs in the first year of life were less at risk of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, which accounts for 85 per cent of blood cancers in youngsters.

Constant cleaning: Could it be that exposure to germs actually helps the immune system?

Further evidence came from the unification of Germany in the early Nineties. In East Germany, hygiene standards were comparatively poor, yet childhood leukaemia rates were low. After unification, hygiene improved and leukaemia rates rose to reach levels seen in the West.

Ken Campbell, clinical information officer at the Leukaemia Research Fund, said: "If there is a delay to the immune system's first challenge from infectious organisms, then, when it does occur, there is a significantly increased risk of childhood leukaemia.

"That's why early attendance at day care centres may help. In day care centres, you get infants coughing, spluttering and sticking their fingers in each others' mouths. So there are constant challenges to the immune system."

This theory about infection and cancer is not new. Over a hundred years ago, an American doctor called William Coley came up with a controversial treatment that involved injecting a cocktail of bacteria straight into the tumour, in a bid to trick the immune system into thinking it was under attack from foreign organisms.

His theory was the body's defence mechanism would launch an assault to destroy the bacteria and cancer.

It worked. The first patient to be treated, in February 1893, was a 16-year-old boy with a huge abdominal tumour. After seven months of treatment, the cancer vanished. The man lived another 26 years, eventually dying of an unrelated heart attack.

The treatment became known as Coley's Fluid and was used in America up until the Fifties.

But now there is renewed interest in such therapies as science uncovers evidence that bugs once thought to be harmful to humans may be used to treat cancer, or even prevent it in the first place.

Yet Ken Campbell stresses the hygiene hypothesis is not proven in cancer, and urges parents to keep the risks of leukaemia from sterile living conditions in perspective. Childhood leukaemia rates are increasing but the disease is still extremely rare.

"We now know the immune system plays a very important role in cancer," says Henry Scowcroft, science information officer at Cancer Research UK.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

