TITLE	Cancer chemicals are found in eggs

by SEAN POULTER and PAUL KENDALL, Daily Mail

Chemicals linked to cancer and birth defects have been found in eggs and chicken portions.

The chemicals, residue from drugs given to chickens, are regarded as too dangerous for use in human medicine.

But the Soil Association said sloppy farming methods and inadequate checks by government officials had allowed them to get into the food chain.

Close to 20 per cent of chicken livers and 10 per cent of the eggs checked in government tests contained residues of the drugs.

That amounts to 160 million affected chickens sold in the last 12 months and 985 million eggs.

The drugs include nicarbazin, known to cause birth defects and hormonal problems in animals, and lasalocid, linked to heart problems.

A third drug, dimetridazole (DMZ), has never been properly evaluated, but there are concerns it can cause birth defects and cancer.

Some of the drugs are also said to interfere with the working of prescription medicines. The Government insisted there was no risk, but the Soil Association said it was concerned about the lack of safety data.

It quoted a letter from leading toxicologist, Dr Derek Renshaw, of the Food Standards Agency, which stated: 'I feel very uncomfortable when asked to comment on the consumer health significance of any residues of nicarbazin found in foods.'

The drugs are given to chickens to combat parasites that thrive in factory farming conditions.

Farmers are ordered to stop using them nine days before broiler chickens are slaughtered to allow any residues to leave their bodies. It is also forbidden to feed them to laying hens.

The Soil Association's report, however, claimed these rules were routinely broken.

Checks by officials from the Veterinary Medicines Directorate, an agency of the Ministry of Agriculture, were easy to evade, it said.

Co-author of the report, Richard Young, said: 'Batches of medicated and non-medicated feed are being mixed up. To add to the problem, farmers are not cleaning bins and automatic feeding equipment properly.

'The electro-static properties of the drugs mean they stick to the inside of the equipment and contaminate supposedly non-medicated feed.'

Worse still, Mr Young said some farmers were not withdrawing the drugs from the birds when they should.

'In the case of nicarbazin, they are meant to stop giving the drug nine days before slaughter, but the animals can be infected by parasites during that nine-day period, so some farmers cheat and carry on giving out the medicated feed,' he said.

Figures used in the Soil Association report are based on government tests in 1998 and 1999, which are the latest statistics available.

They found nicarbazin at above recommended levels in 18 per cent of chicken livers. In one sample, the level was 50 times higher. Nicarbazin was also in 2 per cent of eggs.

Lasalocid is not licensed for laying hens, however it was found in 8.5 per cent of batches sampled.

It was also in 12 per cent of chicken muscle samples.

DMZ was in 0.5 per cent of eggs despite the fact it is not allowed in feed given to laying hens.

Patrick Holden, director of the Soil Association, which sets standards for organic farming, said producers were guilty of 'grossly irresponsible risk-taking' and demanded action 'to prevent the human costs of a long-term public health disaster'.

The Association claimed the Ministry of Agriculture had provided misleading data about drug residues.

'They maintain that 99 per cent of poultry meat and 97 per cent of eggs are free of detectable residues,' the report said. 'However, detailed analysis suggests the actual levels could be up to 2,000 per cent higher.'

Richard Young added: 'These antimicrobial drugs have never been properly evaluated for safety, but there is evidence that they have the ability to cause cancer, birth defects and heart attacks.

'Some residue samples are more than 50 times over the legal limit, yet the Veterinary Medicines Directorate has brought no prosecutions.'

A spokesman for MAFF said: 'We have made no attempt whatsoever to misrepresent any figures.

'The tests we do are carried out under international regulated standards.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

