TITLE	Fertility drug 'may double cancer risk'

By BEEZY MARCH

Last updated at 15:57 09 February 2008

Fertility drugs used by thousands of women to boost their chances of having a baby could double the risk of cancer.

The 23,000 women who take clomiphene every year have twice the chance of developing thyroid cancer, a study suggests.

The drug is the most commonly used fertility treatment in Britain.

It is often given to 'kick-start' ovaries before before women start more invasive procedures such as IVF.

The study also warns that the hormonal treatment progesterone, used to improve a woman's chances of having a baby under IVF, may raise the risk of thyroid cancer by up to ten times. However, more research is needed to confirm this.

The study of more than 54,000 women, published in the medical journal Human Reproduction, last night led to calls for better regulation of fertility drugs.

Researchers from Copenhagen University Hospital found 29 cases of thyroid cancer among women aged 28 to 55, with most diagnoses taking place seven years after fertility treatment.

The majority had taken clomiphene, also known by the brand name Clomid, before developing the cancer, which kills 200 British women a year.

In two of the 29 cases the women had taken progesterone, which is used to make the woman's body have a period in preparation for implantation of an IVF embryo.

The study looked into thyroid cancer because the gland plays a crucial role in hormonal balance, which may affect fertility.

Clomid is commonly used as a first treatment for women who are "subfertile" - those who have tried for a baby for more than a year without success.

It is also effective for around one in three infertile women whose problems are caused by a condition called polycystic ovarian syndrome.

This may lead to a failure to ovulate, which Clomid overcomes by "tricking" the brain into producing the hormonal reaction needed to create an egg.

Clomid was also used in IVF treatment in the 1990s, but is no longer used as other drugs are more successful. This means hundreds of women may have a raised cancer risk from treatment they had more than a decade ago.

Josephine Quintavalle, of the pressure group Comment On Reproductive Ethics, said: "The alarming thing is these drugs have been widely prescribed for years without doctors knowing their full effects."

But Professor Alison Murdoch, of The Centre for Life fertility clinic in Newcastle, said the study did not prove a "causal link" between clomiphene and thyroid cancer.

She added: "I don't think there is any need for women to change their therapy based on its findings."

The Government's Medicines and Healthcare Regulatory Authority said its would examine the study.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

