TITLE	sunbathing 3

came rushing out and asked if everything was OK that I burst into tears. It was then that it hit me: I had cancer.

I suppose I didn't really under-stand the seriousness of it all then. If anything, I was more concerned about vanity. When I went in for surgery and they told me that they would have to dig deep into my leg and that I might need a skin graft, all I could think about was having an ugly scar and never being able to wear skirts or shorts again.

I ended up with a six-inch scar but I didn't need a skin graft. After the operation, I felt fantastic because all the neighbours had bought me presents and cards. Besides, the doctors had told me the operation was a success and the chances of me getting the cancer again were very slim. As far as I was concerned, the chapter was closed.

We moved to London shortly afterwards, and in January 1993 I met John. Four months later, I discovered I was pregnant. It hadn't been planned and, at 19, I felt I was too young.

Despite everything, though, I was determined to go ahead with having the baby. Looking back, I think it was fate, because I know now that if I hadn't had a baby so young, I would never have had a child at all.

Just four months after Shannon's birth, I found a lump the size of a golf ball on my right thigh, a few inches above the scar. I'd been pushing Shannon around in her pram, when I felt a pain as though someone had kicked me.

My GP referred me to the Royal Free Hospital in Hampstead, London, where cancer was diagnosed again. Worse, further scans uncovered three more lumps around my groin. All four had to be removed.

I felt sick with fear. The doctor explained that the chances of it coming back were minimal, but the situation was very serious. This time, although I was shocked, I felt confident in the medical team, who were honest, reassuring and had everything under control.

They told me I would have to have the lymph nodes in my right leg removed, too, to prevent the cancer spreading. I was devastated. My little girl was just a baby, and I was scared for her sake.

Two weeks after the operation, I went home. The surgery was followed by six months of thrice-weekly injections of the drug inter-feron alpha-2a - now licensed as Roferon-A - which was then on trial and helps boost your immune system.

Yet, for all the treatment, the cancer returned in February 1996, and this time it had spread to my left ovary.

I'd been feeling sick over Christmas and had lost 1 1/2 stone in weight. A friend I hadn't seen for eight months burst into tears when she saw how thin and ill I looked.

When doctors said I would have to have the ovary removed, I felt this nightmare would never end. How much more would I have to take? Four gruelling sessions of chemotherapy followed. I felt exhausted.

In August that year, I had a pea-like lump removed from my neck - cancerous again - under local anaesthetic. I tried to remain optimistic, and I've always been a fighter, but it was getting harder and harder.

But the worst was still to come. Three months later, I started feeling nauseous again. I knew there was something very wrong and, terrified, I was taken to hospital for a scan. This time, the doctors told me, the cancer had gone berserk. Apparently, the tumour was hormone-dependent and changes during pregnancy might have stimulated dormant cancer cells.

They explained that the cancer had spread to the other ovary and if something drastic wasn't done, I wouldn't survive. At the very least, I would have to undergo a full hysterectomy.

I was devastated - I was only 22 and would not be able to have any more children. But I knew I had no choice. I reminded myself that there were people a lot worse off than me and I was lucky to have my family and a devoted partner. So, once again, I braced myself for surgery.

I continued having interferon alpha-2a until January 2000, and since then I've been free of the dis-ease. I can honestly say that I feel on top of the world today, though I still have to go for check-ups every four months.

I can't pretend the illness hasn't taken its toll, and there were times when I would close the door to my bedroom and sob my heart out. But, on the whole, I kept focused and positive.

Nor has it all been doom and gloom. There is a bright side. I used to be incredibly shy when I was younger. Now, I'm a lot more confident because I no longer waste time worrying about minor things. I know I have to live my life to the full.

I've also learned what's important in life - and that's the people around me. John and I are saving up to get married, which was put on hold during the illness, and eventually we want to move away from the bustle of London to Cornwall.

What worries me most is other people's stupidity. We all know that over-exposure to the sun can lead to cancer - so why do thousands of adults risk their lives by basking in the sunshine for two weeks every year, refusing to use high protection sunscreen or sensible clothing?

Once, I was so outraged to see a woman let her red-haired child roast in the sun that I stormed over and told her how selfish she was being. She told me it was none of my business, which of course it isn't. But I don't want anyone else to go through what I have.

As for Shannon, I make sure she is covered in Factor 30 when she goes outside, and I always make her wear a sun hat. Whenever I go outdoors, I, too, wear a high factor cream and cover up with a trendy sun hat, T-shirt and loose-fitting trousers.

Don't get me wrong: I love the sun and I think it can make you feel great. But I will never, ever sun-bathe again. How can a tan be worth risking your life for?

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

