TITLE	Brainy people have a higher chance of developing an alcohol problem, say scientists

By DANIEL MARTIN

Last updated at 16:47 10 February 2008

Intelligent people are more likely to develop alcohol-related health problems than their less brainy counterparts, a study has found.

Women are more likely to develop an alcohol problem in their thirties

Middle-class women are particularly likely to drink heavily in their 30s - putting them at risk of liver disease and certain types of cancer.

Scientists from the Medical Research Council say intelligent people are more likely to have stressful jobs - driving them to drink.

And women working in male-dominated professions are particularly susceptible to falling victim to alcohol problems.

The findings confirm warnings by public health minister Dawn Primarolo that the most serious drinking problems were among the middle classes.

The study, led by David Batty of the MRC's social and public health services unit at Glasgow University, concluded: "An explanation might be that success in the workplace requires, in some circumstances, a willingness to drink frequently and to excess in social situations."

Scientists looked at 8,710 men and women born in Britain during one week in 1970.

They compared their mental ability at the age of 10 with information about alcohol consumption and drink problems at the age of 30.

The study, published in the American Journal of Public Health, showed that those with higher childhood mental ability scores had higher rates of problem drinking in adulthood.

The increased risk of drink problems was higher for intelligent women than for men.

Those who admitted to drinking most days had the highest mental ability scores, while those who claimed never to have alcohol had the lowest.

Women in professional and managerial jobs had the highest rate of alcohol problems among women.

Last month, middle class women were warned that they were drinking much more than they thought.

The surge was revealed after the Government was forced to revise consumption calculations because of the trend towards larger wine glasses.

It means up to a third of women are drinking beyond safe estimates every week - much higher than previous estimates.

The official statistics showed that the more you earn, the more you drink - with those in higher income groups consuming 30 per cent more alcohol than the working classes.

The Office for National Statistics found that those in managerial and professional jobs drink 15.1 units a week, against 11.6 for those in routine and manual occupations. Those in the very highest income brackets have even more.

Under the old calculation system, a glass of wine was one unit. Now it counts as two units and the change means professionals are drinking up to 50 per cent more than the old figures showed.

The new calculations reveal the average woman drinks 9.0 units a week, compared to 6.2 units under the old method. Men are drinking 18.7 units, compared to 14.8 as previously thought.

The proportion of women drinking too much has leapt from a fifth to a third under the new calculations, while 40 per cent of men drink more than the guidelines.

Other stats out last week show that the number of people drinking themselves to death is soaring to unprecedented levels.

Alcohol-related death rates for all people are now double the level they were just 15 years ago - with particularly worrying rises among middle-aged women.

The ONS figures show that in 2005 there were 12.9 deaths per 100,000 people - but this increased to 13.4 in 2006. In 1991 there were 6.9 deaths per 100,000.

This represents a rise in the number of alcohol-deaths - mainly as a result of liver disease - from 4,144 in 1991 to 8,758 in 2006.

But experts are concerned about sharp increases in deaths among middle-aged women, which has doubled between 1991 and 2006 to 14.8 per 100,000 population.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

