TITLE	How sunbathing can kill

by CARMEN BRUGEMAN, Daily Mail

Today, aged 26, Gaynor, a part-time sales assistant, is clear of the disease and lives happily with her fiance John, 27, and their daughter Shannon, seven.

But she vows that she will never sunbathe again. Her shocking story is a warning to everyone.

About 12 months ago, a girl I know told me she'd booked a course of sunbed treatments to get her skin ready for a two-week honeymoon in the sun. I was horrified. I couldn't believe what I was hearing.

She knew what I had been trough while fighting malignant melanoma - the deadliest form of skin cancer - for years, but no matter what I said, she wouldn't listen. She was determined to get her tan.

Like thousands of others, she clearly thought it would never happen to her, and that I was just one of the unlucky ones.

Yet the truth is that skin cancer can affect anyone, at any age. Indeed, these days, doctors are diagnosing melanoma - which is directly related to the sun - in young people all the time, a legacy of childhoods spent playing outdoors, with little or no protection.

In my case, it started with a little mole on my leg, just above my right knee. It stood out because I had only three moles on my entire body. My school friends where I grew up, joked little blob looked like a blunt pencil tip. It seemed such a harmless thing and in those days it was.

When I was a child, nobody really knew anything about skin cancer and the dangers of too their children playing out without sun cream.

It wasn't until I was 15 that I became aware of the dangers of over-exposure to the sun. We'd recently moved to Stevenage, Herts, where my father was running a public house and my mother worked as a nurse.

There was a programme on TV about moles and how to spot danger signs, such as them changing shape or colour, itching and bleeding. Just a week later, as I was climbing out of the bath, I noticed blood seeping out of the mole on my leg.

It was not obvious bleeding, more like the oozing you see when a scab is knocked. But I remembered what the programme had said - that you should get any changes checked out in case it was an early sign of cancer - and showed it to my mum. I noticed her face visibly pale. She took me to our GP that same day.

I had a biopsy two days later and then went on a school trip to France, which kept my mind occupied while we waited for the results. When I came back, I'd almost forgotten about the appointment with the doctor at the hospital two days later.

So the news that I had skin cancer came as a massive shock. I suppose I didn't really understand the seriousness of it all then. If anything, I was more concerned about vanity.

When I went in for surgery and they told me that they would have to dig deep into my leg and that I might need a skin graft, all I could think about was having an ugly scar and never being able to wear skirts or shorts again.

I ended up with a six-inch scar but I didn't need a skin graft. The doctors had told me the operation was a success and the chances of me getting the cancer again were very slim.

We moved to London shortly afterwards, and in January 1993 I met John. Four months later, I discovered I was pregnant. It hadn't been planned and, at 19, I felt I was too young.

Just four months after Shannon's birth, I found a lump the size of a golf ball on my right thigh, a few inches above the scar. I'd been pushing Shannon around in her pram, when I felt a pain as though someone had kicked me.

My GP referred me to the Royal Free Hospital in Hampstead, London, where cancer was diagnosed again. Worse, further scans uncovered three more lumps around my groin. All four had to be removed.

Two weeks after the operation, I went home. The surgery was followed by six months of thrice-weekly injections of the drug inter-feron alpha-2a - now licensed as Roferon-A - which was then on trial and helps boost your immune system.

Yet, for all the treatment, the cancer returned in February 1996, and this time it had spread to my left ovary.

I'd been feeling sick over Christmas and had lost 1 1/2 stone in weight. A friend I hadn't seen for eight months burst into tears when she saw how thin and ill I looked.

When doctors said I would have to have the ovary removed, I felt this nightmare would never end. How much more would I have to take? Four gruelling sessions of chemotherapy followed. I felt exhausted.

In August that year, I had a pea-like lump removed from my neck - cancerous again - under local anaesthetic. I tried to remain optimistic, and I've always been a fighter, but it was getting harder and harder.

But the worst was still to come. Three months later, I started feeling nauseous again. I knew there was something very wrong and, terrified, I was taken to hospital for a scan.

This time, the doctors told me, the cancer had gone berserk. Apparently, the tumour was hormone-dependent and changes during pregnancy might have stimulated dormant cancer cells.

They explained that the cancer had spread to the other ovary and if something drastic wasn't done, I wouldn't survive. So, once again, I braced myself for surgery.

I continued having interferon alpha-2a until January 2000, and since then I've been free of the disease. I can honestly say that I feel on top of the world today, though I still have to go for check-ups every four months.

Nor has it all been doom and gloom. There is a bright side. I used to be incredibly shy when I was younger. Now, I'm a lot more confident because I no longer waste time worrying about minor things. I know I have to live my life to the full.

What worries me most is other people's stupidity. We all know that over-exposure to the sun can lead to cancer - so why do thousands of adults risk their lives by basking in the sunshine for two weeks every year, refusing to use high protection sunscreen or sensible clothing?

Don't get me wrong: I love the sun and I think it can make you feel great. But I will never, ever sun-bathe again. How can a tan be worth risking your life for?

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

