TITLE	Could vitamin pills do a cancer patient more harm than good?

By JENNY HOPE

Last updated at 08:50 18 February 2008

Cancer patients who use vitamin and mineral supplements could risk them interfering with treatment

Cancer patients who use vitamin and mineral supplements could risk them interfering with treatment or even making the disease worse, a study claims.

Researchers say there is a lack of evidence about the usefulness of supplements in cancer survivors, many of whom are unaware of possible side effects.

They also found as many as two in three cancer patients fail to tell doctors they are taking supplements even though it could affect their treatment.

A review published in the Journal of Clinical Oncology looked at 32 studies carried out between 1999 and 2006.

It found between two thirds and three-quarters of cancer patients used dietary supple-ments, compared with half of the general population.

Lead researcher Cornelia Ulrich, of the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Centre, Seattle, said the jury was still out on whether supplements were good or bad for cancer survivors.

&quot;While supplement use may be beneficial for some patients, such as those who cannot eat a balanced diet, research suggests certain supplements may actually interfere with treatment or even accelerate cancer growth.&quot;

In the UK there are an estimated 1.2million survivors of cancer, according to Cancer Research UK. Around 10million Britons take supplements regularly.

The U.S. study found breast cancer survivors were the highest users of supplements, with three out of four patients taking them, while men who had prostate cancer were least likely to take them (26-35 per cent).

Many patients started taking them after the disease was diagnosed.

Dr Ulrich said: &quot;Cancer survivors report that they hope to strengthen their immune system with supplement use.

&quot;Evidence clearly suggests the need for caution. Some vitamins, such as folic acid, may be involved in cancer progression while others, such as St John&#39;s wort, can interfere with chemotherapy.&quot;

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

