TITLE	Skin cancer cases increase by 46 per cent in just seven years

Last updated at 22:28 22 February 2008

Rise: Skin cancer rates have increased by 46 per cent in seven years

Rates of deadly skin cancer have almost doubled in some areas in less than a decade, stark figures showed yesterday.

Across England, rates of malignant melanoma have shot up by 46 per cent in just seven years - making it the fastest growing cancer.

But in Yorkshire, there were 80 per cent more cases of this type of skin cancer in 2004 than in 1997, as people ignore warnings to stay out of the sun.

The Conservatives, who uncovered the disturbing statistics, slammed the Government for ignoring the risk and cutting funding for campaigns to educate people about the dangers of over-exposure.

Health spokesman Andrew Lansley said: &quot;These figures are deeply concerning, especially the stark regional disparities.

&quot;A relatively high level of melanoma is to be expected in sunnier regions where there is more outdoor activity as in the south west, but this is not the case in the north where incidences have risen well above the national average.

&quot;In their dithering and short-term thinking, Labour have failed to make helping people understand how to stay healthy a priority.

&quot;It&#39;s telling that they cut funding for their main information campaign against skin cancer just after the worst of the NHS financial crisis.

&quot;And it&#39;s typical of their &#39;nanny state&#39; approach that the best Alan Johnson could come up with on this issue in his cancer strategy was to think about banning sunbeds.

&quot;More research is urgently required so that people become aware of the risks of skin cancer and preventative measures can be taken.&quot;

The figures reveal that in 1997, there were 5,000 cases of malignant melanoma - increasing to 7,400 in 2004 - a rise of 46 per cent.

There were vast discrepancies in the regional increase between 1997 and 2004.

As well as the 80 per cent increase seen in Yorkshire and the Humber, rates rose by 66 per cent in the east Midlands and 62 per cent in the south west. By contrast, the rise in London was just 6 per cent.

The highest rates for skin cancer are in the south west - in 2004 there were almost 1,300 cases, followed by the north west with just under 1,000.

Malignant melanoma is now England&#39;s fastest rising cancer - just ahead of prostate cancer.

It is the second most common form of cancer in 20 to 39 year olds. Around 2,000 people die from it every year in the UK.

Middle class women are two and a half times to get the disease than their working class counterparts.

Over the last 25 years the incidence in men has quadrupled and in women has tripled.

But despite the increased danger, the Government slashed funding for Cancer Research UK&#39;s SunSmart campaign from &pound;150,000 in 2006/07 to &pound;104,000 a year later - a reduction of 31 per cent.

The funding cut came in the wake of a damaging NHS financial crisis, when hospitals across the country were forced to close wards and cut jobs and services.

The campaign aims to raise awareness among young people of the dangers of skin cancer.

It spreads simple messages such as: Don&#39;t burn, spend time in the shade in the middle of the day, cover up with sunhats, glasses and T-shirts, use Factor 15 sunscreen to protect the skin and take particular care with young children.

Dr Julie Sharp of Cancer Research UK said: &quot;We know that people from all areas of the UK take advantage of cheap flights to have holidays in hot climates.

&quot;And our surveys have shown that an alarmingly high number of holiday-makers aim to come home with a suntan at any cost - even if it means getting burnt.

&quot;But sunburn doubles the risk of malignant melanoma and the kind of sunbathing binges that happen when people go abroad and bake on the beach are particularly dangerous.&quot;

A spokesman for the Department of Health said: &quot;Cancer care has improved significantly in the last ten years - clinicians, patients and cancer charities all agree.

&quot;There are now more staff than ever before are caring for people with cancer, and over 99 per cent of patients referred urgently by their GP with a suspicion of cancer are now seen within two weeks.

&quot;The SunSmart programme is just one of a range of measures the Department is funding to raise skin cancer awareness.&quot;

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

