TITLE	Fears of rise in skin cancer as pale teenagers subjected to 'tanning taunts' by bullies head for sunbeds

Last updated at 22:20 25 February 2008

A golden tan is becoming a must-have accessory in the playground.

Children are under pressure to have a glowing complexion, with some youngsters being bullied for being too pale, health workers claim.

The allegation emerged as figures showed 60 per cent of teenage girls in Liverpool are at risk of cancer because of their use of sunbeds.

Scroll down for more...

Underage tanning: Young skin is particulary vulnerable to UV rays

A study focusing on 13 to 15-year-olds from two schools on Merseyside showed children using sunbeds with dangerous regularity.

It also found a majority of underage tanners were not asked for proof of age before using the sunbeds.

The research was carried out by the Merseysideand Cheshire Cancer Network and the Liverpool Primary Care Trust.

Network spokesman Paul Mackenzie said: &quot;Within the schools there appeared to be a culture of peer pressure for children to be tanned, extending to bullying in some cases for those children with very pale skin.

&quot;There was a very good awareness of the dangers of sun exposure and the risk of skin cancer but not about the dangers of sunbeds.

&quot;Teachers now have more information to pass on to their pupils about the health risks.&quot;

While government guidelines strongly advise against allowing children under 16 to use sunbeds, this is not banned by law.

Dr Paula Grey, director of public health for Liverpool, said: &quot;These figures are alarming and prove the obsession some teenagers have with looking tanned when it is far healthier to be pale and interesting.

&quot;There is also a responsibility of the owners of sunbed shops to protect young people from the obvious risks.

&quot;We are working closely with our colleagues within the NHS to raise awareness about the dangers.&quot;

The findings, which also show 80 per cent of a child&#39;s lifetime exposure to UVA rays occurs before the age of 21, have prompted the PCT to join forces with Cancer UK to look further at sunbed usage among young people on a national level.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

