TITLE	Wonders of the humble tomato

by DR JOHN BRIFFA

During recent years, there has been a lot of scientific interest in the health benefits of eating the so-called 'Mediterranean diet'.

Attempts to explain what it is about Southern Italian and Greek cuisine that reduces the risk of conditions such as heart disease and certain cancers have traditionally pointed to the health-giving properties of olive oil, oily fish and red wine.

Now, researchers are focusing their attention on the humble tomato. Science has revealed that eating a diet rich in tomatoes may help to reduce the risk of conditions such as prostate and lung cancer.

In particular, the properties of a substance called lycopene, believed to be the tomato's chief health-giving constituent, are being investigated.

More and more evidence is stacking up to suggest that lycopene might be a useful tool in the fight against a wide range of life-threatening conditions.

Lycopene is part of a group of nutrients known as the carotenoids; it is a relative of the better known beta-carotene and lycopene produces 'antioxidant' activity in the body.

This property gives lycopene the potential for reducing the risk of conditions such as heart disease and cancer caused, at least in part, by destructive molecules called free radicals.

Interestingly, lycopene has been found to be a more potent antioxidant than many other nutrients including beta-carotene and vitamin E, throwing up the suggestion that its disease protecting effects might be greater, too.

One condition for which lycopene seems to be particularly protective is prostate cancer. Because of its increasing incidence, much has been made over the past decade of the value of screening.

However, while detecting cancer early on is desirable, my view is that preventing it from happening in the first place is a far better approach. In this respect, it appears as though lycopene has much to offer.

One recent study published in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute showed that men consuming high levels of tomato and tomato products such as pasta sauce reduced their risk of prostate cancer by 35pc.

This study also showed that high tomato consumption more than halved the risk of more aggressive prostate cancer too. In addition, evidence from around the world suggests that lycopene may help protect against other common cancers.

There is good research linking high lycopene consumption to a reduced risk of lung and stomach cancer, and there is some thought that lycopene can help protect against cancers of the breast, cervix, mouth, pancreas, colon, rectum and oesophagus too.

Lycopene's antioxidant properties appear also to give it value as an agent in the prevention of the West's number one killer - heart disease.

While many of us are aware that high levels of cholesterol in the blood stream increase the risk of heart disease, it is not well known that cholesterol per se is not the problem.

Animal studies show that only when cholesterol becomes 'oxidised' (damaged) by free radical molecules is it likely to clog arteries and increase the risk of heart disease.

Lycopene has been shown to protect cholesterol from oxidation, and is therefore very likely to afford protection from heart disease in the long term.

So, is getting more lycopene in the diet simply a matter of eating more tomatoes? Actually, the form of the tomatoes we consume seems to have a critical bearing on how easily the body is able to absorb lycopene.

It is what is termed a 'lipid soluble' nutrient which means it dissolves much more readily in oil than in water.

Lycopene appears to be best absorbed when it has been cooked with oil. Such is the case with tomato-based sauces commonly eaten in the Mediterranean.

Baked beans also seem to offer a cheap and convenient way of obtaining lycopene in the diet, though low sugar and salt varieties are preferred. Raw tomatoes and, in particular, tomato juice, do not appear to be good sources of absorbable lycopene.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

