TITLE	Herbal drug gives cancer patients hope

by LIZ HODGSON

An ancient Chinese herbal remedy is proving so effective in treating men in the advanced stages of prostate cancer that mainstream American doctors are endorsing it.

Two studies in prestigious medical publications, the Journal of Urology and the Journal of Clinical Oncology, show the blend of eight herbs, PC Spes, seems particularly helpful for men who have tried conventional treatments.

Dr Aaron Katz, associate professor of urology at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, studied 69 men for the Journal of Urology. He found that 88 per cent of his patients taking the supplement had a significant drop in the levels of prostate specific antigen, a protein which indicates tumours.

However, Dr Eric Small of the University of California, San Francisco, co-author of the other study which reported a 54 per cent success rate, warned: "We don't know the long-term side effects."

The blend was imported by herbal doctor Allan Wang, whose great-grandfather was said to have treated the last Chinese emperor. It has been on the market since 1999 and is used by an estimated 10,000 men. There are side-effects, most notably breast tenderness and enlargement, and up to four per cent of patients run the risk of potentially deadly blood clots.

Because of this, supporters recommend it should be used only by patients who have not been helped by traditional treatments.

Makers of herbal treatments in the US are not allowed to make claims that they cure or prevent disease, however, those behind PC Spes admit the name stands for Prostate Cancer Hope - Spes being the Latin word for hope.

The supplement is to be studied with a view to its approval as a drug, so users might be able to get a reimbursement of cost, up to &pound;300 a month, from insurance.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

