TITLE	Plans for 'cancer shields' in mobile phones

by MYRANDA MOWAFI, Daily Mail

Mobile phone manufacturers are developing 'cancer shields' to reduce the risk of brain tumours in users.

Engineers are said to have been working on the devices to reduce the impact of radiation emissions from handsets.

Nokia, Ericsson and possibly Motorola are in the process of patenting the shields after almost eight years of research.

Company chiefs still insist, however, that mobile handsets do not pose a health risk. They claim there is no contradiction between this stance and the patents.

Nokia is thought to have filed an application with the U.S. Patent Office in Washington.

The application explains 'it has been suggested' that continuous exposure to radio frequency irradiation could lead 'to a development of malignant tumour'.

The shields are described as stickers or metal attachments which cover part of the antennae on the handset or are placed near it.

William Plum-mer, Nokia's vice president in charge of government and industry affairs in the U.S., played down the patent application yesterday.

Given that a third of the company's work force was devoted to research, it was not unusual, he said.

'Filing a patent is a normal course of business. That we would have engineers protecting their work is natural.

'This particular patent I believe was first drawn up in about 1999 as part of an ongoing look at products that are as power efficient as possible.

'The fact that a shield for radiation frequency emissions may have been tested is not an issue.

'As engineers develop new technology, which advances rapidly and requires huge sources of energy, the equipment will continue to develop.'

Mr Plummer maintained that no link had been found between radiation emissions from mobile telephones and brain tumours.

Michael Westmark, a spokesman for Ericsson, said designs for the shields were first produced by the firm's engineers in the mid-1990s but were rejected as being out of line with company policy.

Three similar devices had, however, been studied closely by the firm's scientists within the last 14 months, he said.

'We have tried them and what happens if we put something on the mobile telephone is that it has proved to decrease the radio waves and does not help the efficiency of the telephone.

'A number of shields have been tested in the labs.'

Alasdair Philips, of the British consumer watchdog Power-watch, said: 'This is confirmation that the phone companies take the possibility of health problems far more seriously than they say in public.'

Two years ago Alan Preece, a medical physicist at Bristol University, showed in a Govern-ment-funded study that mobile phone radiation could affect brain activity.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

