TITLE	Cancer risk goes on long after women stop HRT, say researchers

By DANIEL MARTIN

Last updated at 08:29 05 March 2008

Worry: HRT is linked to a range of diseases

Hormone replacement therapy patients face a higher cancer danger long after they have stopped the treatment, according to a major study.

Breast cancer risk is still 27 per cent higher three years after women ended use of HRT, when compared to those who never had the treatment.

Previous studies have shown a link between HRT and breast cancer - but it was believed the heightened risk disappeared after a few years.

The latest study also found that, three years on, hormone treatment increased the risk of developing any form of cancer by 24 per cent.

The research was carried out by the same team which alerted the world in 2002 to the possible dangers of combined HRT, the type which uses two different hormones.

The original U.S. study, by the Women&#39;s Health Initiative, left women fearful as they faced conflicting advice as to whether they should continue the therapy.

More than a million women in Britain stopped taking HRT at the height of the scare, leaving them to cope with the hot flushes, palpitations and depression associated with the menopause.

Now the follow-up study, again by the WHI, looks likely to reignite concerns. Last night cancer experts warned that women should only have HRT if they really needed it - and for as short a time as possible.

Researchers looked at 16,000 women, with an average age of 63, who had taken part in the original study, which compared the health of women either on HRT or taking an inactive placebo.

The first study was abruptly ended when it became clear there was a significantly increased risk of breast cancer and heart disease among women on HRT.

These women were then advised to stop taking HRT and were monitored over the next three years for the follow-up study.

At the end of that time, the numbers of heart attacks and strokes were similar among those who had taken HRT and the placebo - meaning the increased risk had disappeared after three years.

But the increased risk of breast cancer remained stubbornly at the high level it had been while the women were taking HRT.

During the follow-up study there were 63 more diagnoses of cancer among former HRT users than among women who did not have the treatment - or three per 1,000 participants per year, according to the research in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

Professor Marcia Stefanick, one of the study authors, said: &quot;The continued increased risk of breast cancer clearly plays a role in the increased overall risk of cancer years after stopping long-term oestrogen plus progestin therapy.&quot;

The professor, of Stanford University, California, concluded there was a 12 per cent increased risk - linked to HRT - of heart disease, invasive breast cancer, stroke, lung blood clots, cancer of the womb lining, bowel cancer, hip fracture and death.

Dr Michael Lauer, of the U.S. National Institutes of Health, which funded the study, said: &quot;This study provides further evidence that five years of combination hormone therapy is harmful.

&quot;All the accumulated risks do not simply disappear.&quot;

Dr Kat Arney, of Cancer Research UK, said: &quot;This significant study adds to the evidence that women should only take HRT specifically to treat symptoms of the menopause, and for as short a time as possible.

&quot;Women who are taking HRT and are concerned about their risk should speak to their doctor.&quot;

Tara Beaumont, of Breast Cancer Care, said: &quot;We would encourage all post menopausal women to attend every routine breast screening appointment they receive and to report any changes in their breasts or worries to their GP without delay.&quot;

There have been conflicting findings on the side effects of long-term use of HRT.

Last year some of the authors of the 2002 Women&#39;s Health Initiative report revised their original findings.

They said the increased risk only affected those who started taking HRT for the first time in their 60s and 70s - later than is usual in the UK.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

