TITLE	Mobile firms urged to come clean over shield plans

by PAUL KENDALL, Daily Mail

Mobile phone manufacturers were urged to 'come clean' over potentially cancer-causing radiation from handsets.

Campaigners described the revelation that Nokia, Ericsson and Motorola were developing 'cancer shields' to reduce the risk of brain tumours as 'deeply alarming'.

The so- called 'Big Three', who insist their phones do not pose a health risk, are all in the process of patenting the shields after almost eight years of research.

'These patents suggest manufacturers know more than they are saying about the dangers of mobile phones,' said safety campaigner Simon Best, of the consumer group Powerwatch.

'Either that, or they think it's inevitable researchers will eventually prove that using mobile phones damages our health.'

In total, 25 patents have been uncovered by the U.S. campaign group Wireless Consumer Alliance.

Phone company bosses say there is no contradiction between their public stance and the existence of the patents.

In one patent filed by Nokia with the U.S. Patent Office in Washington, the application explains 'it has been suggested' that continuous exposure to radio frequency irradiation could lead 'to a development of malignant tumour'.

The shields are described as stickers or metal attachments which cover part of the antennae on the handset or are placed near it.

A spokesman for Motorola said yesterday: 'The safety of our customers is of paramount importance.

The innovations in the patents referred to in recent media reports address the design, performance and efficiency of our products and were not motivated by concerns about potential health issues.

'Any claim to the contrary is a mis-interpretation of the facts.'

A spokesman for Nokia said patenting innovations was 'standard practice' and did not imply that there were any uncovered health issues.

More than two-thirds of Britons now use a mobile phone, amid growing concern over potential health problems.

Experiments in 1999 showed that the phones altered the way the human brain worked, speeding up reaction times.

Last year, the Government's Stewart report concluded there was no evidence of harm to users' health, but called for more research.

It said teenagers and younger children - who are the biggest users of mobile phones - could be at increased risk because of their developing brains and relatively thin skulls.

A spokesman for the Federation of Electronics Industry said: 'The balance of scientific evidence to date has suggested that mobile phones operating within international exposure guidelines do not cause adverse health effects.

'That is the most recent finding of the French scientific review this year, the World Health Organisation and the Stewart report last year.'

A spokesman for the Telecommunications Users' Association said: 'In the absence of any strict scientific knowledge, at least they are building radiation shields just in case evidence does come up and show there is a health problem.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

