TITLE	ONE glass of wine a night can increase risk of breast cancer by 60 per cent

By GWYNETH REES

Last updated at 09:02 22 March 2008

Middle-aged women who drink one glass of wine a night increase their risk of breast cancer by 60 per cent, an alarming new study shows.

Up to 2,000 women every year die from alcohol-related breast cancer, with increasing numbers also suffering from liver cancer and fertility problems related to drink.

Government guidelines recommend women should drink no more than 14 units of alcohol a week.

But in recent years, the strength of many wines has been increased and wine glasses enlargened leading to confusion of how many units of alcohol each glass contains.

Now, a study by the Department of Health - which has not yet been published - has strongly linked drinking alcohol to breast cancer.

Scroll down for more...

Women who drink a glass of wine a night are much more likely to develop breast cancer, according to a new alarming study by the Department of Health

The findings show that women who consumed more than the recommended level of 14 units a week were at least 60 per cent likely to suffer breast cancer than those who stayed below the limit.

With one large glass of wine now estimated to be worth the equivalent of three units, just one per night would add up to more than 20 units a week. As a result of the study, the government is launching a &pound;10 million advertising campaign to clamp down on drinking.

The campaign, which features images such as two wine glasses with no stems to resemble women&#39;s breasts, aims to educate women over the health risks associated with their beverage intake.

It also amounts to an admission from ministers that they have focussed too much on teenage binge drinkers and need to switch their attention to the middle classes.

Women drinking more than the recommended 14 units a week were at least 60 per cent likely to develop the disease

The initiative, which will be shows on TVs, posters and in cinemas, will also signal a move towards emphasising the health impact of drinking instead of focusing almost exclusively to its links with crime and anti-social behaviour. Public Health Minister Dawn Primarolo said: &quot;Women who regularly drink too much are 50 per cent more likely to develop breast cancer and many drink too much simply because they have no idea how many alcohol units they are consuming.

&quot;They don&#39;t know how many units they are drinking and they don&#39;t know that, at 3.5 units, that large glass of Rioja they drank last night actually took them over their daily amount.

&quot;Professional women who drink too much - but do so without causing harm to others - have for a long time gone under the radar.

&quot;But after the campaign no one will be in any doubt as to how many units they&#39;re drinking and the impact that can have on their health.&quot;

Stronger wine, varying from 9 per cent to 13 per cent, and larger glasses, varying from 125ml to 250ml, have led to confusion over how many units drinkers consume.

A large glass of wine can contain as much as 3.5 units of alcohol.

Anti binge-drinking campaigns have previously focused on younger people, but now older women are being targeted.

Health risks for women who binge drink also include a greater risk of liver disease, unplanned pregnancies and ruptured bladders.

Last year, a study revealed that one glass of wine or a pint of beer each day raises the risk of bowel cancer.

The study, of almost half a million people, highlighted a clear link between alcohol and the cancer which claims 16,000 lives a year in the UK alone.

It showed that two units - equivalent to a large glass of wine or a pint of beer - is enough to raise the risk of developing the disease by 10 per cent.

And the more you drink, the greater the threat.

Two pints a day, or two large glasses of wine, increases the risk by a quarter.

Another study showed that three or more alcoholic drinks a day - whether beer, wine or spirits - raises a woman&#39;s risk of breast cancer by as much as 30 per cent.

Women who drank between one and two alcoholic drinks per day increased their risk of breast cancer by ten per cent compared with those who consumed less than one drink each day, the American researchers found.

The risk jumped by 30 per cent in women who consumed more than three drinks a day.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

