TITLE	Half of people unaware that being fat can cause cancer

Last updated at 09:21 25 March 2008

High risk: Researchers say excess weight causes around 4 per cent of all cancers

Around half of people are unaware that being overweight or obese can cause cancer, a poll showed today.

Researchers have estimated that excess weight causes around four per cent of all cancers. Being overweight or obese is linked convincingly to cancer of the oesophagus, bowel, pancreas, womb lining, kidney, and breast in post-menopausal women.

Today&#39;s poll, of 2,178 UK adults, was carried out for the World Cancer Research Fund (WCRF). It found that 48 per cent of people were unaware of the link between excess body fat and cancer risk. The survey also found that only 38 per cent of people knew that drinking alcohol and not taking exercise increased their risk of the disease.

A total of 43 per cent were unaware that having a poor diet is linked to cancer.

Despite media coverage of the link between processed meat and cancer, only 30% of people said they were aware it increased the risk. The WCRF recommends people avoid eating processed meats due to convincing evidence that it is a cause of bowel cancer.

A study published in November by the charity Cancer Research UK estimated that around 6,000 middle-aged or older women in the UK develop cancer each year because they are obese or overweight.

Lucie Galice, general manager of the WCRF, said maintaining a healthy weight was the single most important thing people could do to protect themselves from cancer after stopping smoking.

She added: &quot;It is a real concern that so many people are unaware that they can make a difference to their risk of cancer just by eating healthily, being physically active and maintaining a healthy weight.

&quot;The evidence on this is really clear and in fact scientists estimate that about a third of cancer could be prevented just by doing these things.

&quot;It is important that people know about how they can reduce their cancer risk so that they are able to make informed lifestyle decisions.

&quot;But it is clear we have a long way to go in terms of getting the message across that cancer is a largely preventable disease.&quot;

Overweight and obesity can be calculated by working out a person&#39;s body mass index (BMI). To calculate the figure, weight in kilograms should be divided by the square of the height in metres (height in metres multiplied by itself). A BMI of 25 to 29.9 is considered overweight while a BMI of 30 or above is considered obese.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

