TITLE	The HRT patch being linked to breast cancer - in men

By ROGER DOBSON

Last updated at 11:59 25 March 2008

Testosterone replacement therapy - the male form of HRT ? may increase the risk of the development of breast cancer. Doctors in the UK have reported the first case of a man diagnosed with breast cancer soon after starting to use testosterone patches.

The 61-year-old discovered a lump on his breast just five weeks after starting the therapy and has since undergone a biopsy and mastectomy.

Researchers say testosterone may encourage the growth of pre-existing tumours, or initiate them.

Another study based on men having testosterone treatment for hypogonadism - a condition in which the testes are underactive and produce low levels of the hormone - showed an increased risk, too.

Although male breast cancer is rare, results of the study at Wroclaw Medical University, Poland, show that out of 17 men treated for more than ten years, two developed breast cancer.

&quot;We point to a possible association between long-term androgen replacement and a risk of breast cancer in men,&quot; say the researchers.

But specialists who use testosterone therapy said yesterday that male breast cancer was rare and that the therapy was one of the safest treatments.

Testosterone replacement therapy is increasingly popular and it is estimated that around 100,000 men in Europe now use patches, gels or injections.

Originally used solely to treat male hypogonadism, an increasing number of men are using it to boost libido, increase muscles, sharpen the memory and boost energy levels. It is also prescribed for men in the so-called male menopause..

Although testosterone levels remain, for most men, within the normal range throughout their life, from around 40 to 50 a man&#39;s body produces less. By the age of 80 it can drop to between 50 and 20 per cent of peak levels.

Produced in the testes, testosterone is the main male hormone that helps maintain muscle mass and strength, fat distribution, bone mass, sperm production, sex drive and potency.

Testosterone replacement has been linked to improvements and, according to a report from the Mayo Clinic, it can in some cases restore sexual function and muscle strength, prevent bone loss and protect against heart disease. But the effects are not all good.

Though potentially beneficial for some of these men, testosterone therapy isn&#39;t risk-free.

High doses of testosterone may result in sleep apnoea, infertility and excess blood production, which could increase the risk of stroke, according to the report.

It has also been linked to an enlarged prostate and now a new report has linked it to the development of breast cancer.

The report, from doctors at the Royal Gwent Hospital in South Wales, says that the 61-year-old first saw his GP with erectile dysfunction and low libido. There were no other illnesses or medications that could account for his low testosterone levels.

Testosterone therapy was started to improve his sexual functioning and preserve bone density, but five weeks later the patient returned to his GP complaining of a gradually enlarging lump in his right breast.

As soon as a biopsy showed breast cancer, testosterone therapy was stopped and a right side mastectomy carried out. The man is now taking tamoxifen, the drug widely used to treat breast cancer in women.

&quot;Some of these tumours in male breast cancer are hormone dependent, so when you put them on testosterone they can suddenly grow bigger and possibly even develop from scratch,&quot; says Dr Peter Evans, consultant endocrinologist at the Royal Gwent.

Tests showed that the cancer was the type that can be increased by exposure to hormones.

&quot;To our knowledge, this is the first report of breast cancer becoming clinically manifest after a short duration - five weeks - of testosterone treatment.

&quot;This case should remind clinicians that men receiving testosterone therapy should be warned of the risk of not only prostate cancer but also breast cancer.

&quot;Patient self-monitoring and breast examinations by the attending physician are recommended,&quot; say the researchers.

Dr Malcolm Carruthers, director of the Centre for Men&#39;s Health in Harley Street and author of The Male Menopause, also said that the therapy was safe.

&quot;Testosterone is one of the safest treatments available,&quot; he said.

&quot;What this report fails to emphasise is that male breast cancer is very rare, particularly as a complication of testosterone treatment.

&quot;There are 40 years&#39; experience of adverse reactions to testosterone in the UK and only one case of breast cancer is reported.

&quot;In my experience, with more than 2,000 cases of men treated up to 20 years, I have not had a single case of breast cancer.

&quot;This is an interesting case, and it illustrates a rare complication, but it is being over emphasised to the detriment of men who could benefit considerably from the treatment.

&quot;Testosterone therapy has very big benefits, but many men who could benefit do not. Only 113,000 out of 10 million suitable men in Europe aged over 50 are using it.&quot;

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

