TITLE	HRT 'raises risk of cancer return' researchers warn

By JENNY HOPE

Last updated at 10:47 26 March 2008

Breast cancer survivors using hormone replacement therapy have a higher risk of the disease returning

Hormone replacement therapy can increase the chances of breast cancer returning, researchers have warned.

Survivors may have a higher risk of recurrence after five years if they take HRT to help cope with symptoms of the menopause, according to a study.

The findings involving 440 women breast cancer patients were published online by Scandinavian researchers in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute.

British experts pointed out, however, that other studies had found no evidence of extra risk.

They said it was hard to show any extra danger from the use of oestrogen-only HRT.

It was &quot;far from certain&quot; that using combined HRT with two hormones definitely results in recurrence among breast cancer survivors.

Dr Lars Holmberg, currently at King&#39;s College London, and Scandinavian colleagues examined breast cancer rates in women taking part in a trial.

After a follow-up of four years, 17 per cent of 221 women taking HRT after breast cancer developed a recurrence or a new tumour, compared with 8 per cent of 221 women not taking HRT.

The estimated rate of recurrence over five years was 22 per cent of HRT users and 10 per cent for those not using HRT - an absolute increase in risk of 14 per cent.

The researchers said: &quot;The results indicate a substantial risk for a new breast cancer event among breast cancer survivors using HRT.

&quot;The risk elevation is in line with the evidence that HRT increases the risk of breast cancer in healthy women.&quot;

A spokesman for the British Menopause Society said the results were not straightforward and a study in Stockholm showed there was no risk of recurrence after a similar period of follow-up.

He said: &quot;The UK study of HRT in breast cancer survivors showed findings similar to the Stockholm study in the limited data that were obtained.

&quot;The common findings from both studies are that oestrogen-alone HRT does not appear to increase breast cancer risk and that HRT does not increase the risk of death from breast cancer.

&quot;There may be an increased risk of breast cancer with combined HRT, but this is far from certain.&quot;

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

