TITLE	Italy shuts down mozzarella production as cancer-causing toxin fears spread

Last updated at 10:49 27 March 2008

Italy shut down production at more than 80 cow farms yesterday after detecting higher-than-permitted levels of dioxin - a dangerous toxin that causes skin disfigurement and is linked to cancer.

Dioxin - a chemical that occurs naturally but can occur in higher levels during manufacturing and processing - is also linked to birth defects and organ failure. It can be dangerous even in small amounts.

The European Union said it is taking the scare seriously. Some Asian nations already have taken action to stop imports of tainted cheese.

Scroll down for more ... 

Dive in: A worker at one of the mozzarella factories plunges his hands into a vat of the soft cheese

The level of dioxin in milk and mozzarella in 25 of 130 facilities in southern Italy was &quot;moderately higher&quot; than allowed under EU rules, the Health Ministry said in a statement.

Checks were begun after reports of high levels of dioxin in some samples of buffalo mozzarella. Yesterday, health officials said they put 83 farms that supply materials to 25 cheese makers under seal pending tests.

The ministry insisted the measures would prevent any product or material at risk from reaching consumers and guarantee the safety of mozzarella produced at other plants.

Seeking to limit the damage to sales of one Italy&#39;s most famous food specialties, the agency guaranteed that ongoing production was safe.

Scroll down for more ... 

Poison: An inspector tests balls of mozzarella for dioxin

For days, Italian authorities have been trying to play down the mozzarella health scare.

&quot;It&#39;s a completely exaggerated and groundless alarm,&quot; Foreign Minister Massimo D&#39;Alema said earlier yesterday.

The soft, milky cheese comes mostly from the southern Campania region, where a reputation as a top agricultural producer already has been tarnished by a months-old garbage crisis that has fuelled fears of food contamination.

Many authorities and experts have said a direct link between the garbage crisis and the cheese contamination cannot be established.

Agriculture Minister Paolo De Castro said safety and transparency are priorities in safeguarding &quot;the whole industry, and those entrepreneurs - the overwhelming majority - who work every day for a product that is the crown jewel in our food sector.&quot;

In dairies that produce top-quality buffalo mozzarella, no contamination above the permitted limits had been found, he said.

Scroll down for more ... 

Still, in recent days, South Korea halted imports of the cheese and Japan submitted a list of Italian dairies that export mozzarella to the country, asking if any had tested positive, the Agriculture Ministry said.

De Castro called Seoul&#39;s ban &quot;excessive,&quot; contending that thorough checks are under way and denouncing a &quot;negative campaign&quot; surrounding the case.

Coldiretti, a farmers association, estimated that sales could fall as much as 60 per cent - a drop of several million Euros.

The consumer group Codacons urged mozzarella producers to seek damages in a class-action suit.

In Brussels, EU spokeswoman Nina Papadoulaki said the European Commission was waiting for results from tests by Italian authorities on 100 samples of mozzarella. Results were expected later today.

She said EU authorities were taking the mozzarella health scare &quot;very seriously&quot; and said the EU would take action to ban the products if they are deemed unsafe by Italian health and food safety authorities.

The Russian newspaper Kommersant quoted a top Russian health official, Gennady Onishchenko, as saying inspectors are checking stores and restaurants in Moscow.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

