TITLE	Fibre 'cancer risk' warning

By BEEZY MARSH

For years, it has been promoted as a health food which helps rid the body of toxins and protects against certain cancers.

But the benefits of bran and a high-fibre diet are now under question after a study showed they could actually contribute to bowel cancer.

The tests showed that patients given extra dietary fibre in the form of wheat bran - which is often used in breakfast cereals - developed more pre-cancerous growths, which can often turn into malignant tumours.

Cancer specialists and dieticians urged people not to suddenly abandon bran as a result of the European research.

But the findings clearly fly in the face of previous studies suggesting fibre has a protective effect against bowel cancer, which kills an estimated 18,000 Britons every year.

The Government's Committee on Medical Aspects of Nutrition in Cancer issued guidance in 1998 urging people to eat at least 18 grammes of fibre a day.

Fruit and vegetables contain fibre, but the quickest way to boost intake is to eat bran or wholewheat cereals, which provide half the recommended daily amount in one bowlful.

The advice led to a boom in the consumption of bran and wholegrain products.

Bowel cancer, the second commonest cause of cancer deaths in the Western world, is diagnosed in 30,000 people in Britain every year. Up to 90 per cent of cases develop from pre-cancerous polyps in the bowel wall.

Doctors from the European Cancer Prevention Organisation, based in Dijon, France, found that supplementing the diet of someone susceptible to such polyps with wheat bran increased the chance of them developing.

Professor Gordon McVie, of the Cancer Research Campaign, said: 'This is an interesting study but it is a confusing area. It looked at the benefits of fibre in isolation from other foodstuffs.

Other studies show a high-fibre diet which includes plenty of vegetables, fruit and wholegrains, can still help protect against bowel cancer.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

