TITLE	Wine 'helps prevent cancer'

by JAMES CHAPMAN

Wine can protect against one of the most common forms of cancer, research reveals.

Those who drink at least a glass of red or white a week are much less likely to suffer bowel cancer than teetotallers or drinkers who consume beer or spirits.

Such cancer is the second biggest cause of deaths from the disease, with a toll of 18,000 British victims a year. The research, presented at a conference in the U.S., goes against conventional belief that all types of alcohol increase the risk of cancer.

Researchers from the State University of New York analysed results of examinations carried out on 1,500 people. They were looking for polyps, or adenomas, which grow on the wall of the bowel and are thought to trigger the cancer.

Dr Catherine Messina, who led the study, found that only one per cent of wine drinkers had significant polyps, compared with 18 per cent of beer or grain-based spirit drinkers, and 12 per cent of those who abstain.

Dr Messina said previous research had suggested that alcohol use might increase the risk for developing bowel cancer. Her study was the first to examine the varying effects of different types of alcohol.

Other health-boosting properties of drinking wine have already been shown. For example, drinking two glasses a day is thought to cut the risk of heart disease by at least 25 per cent.

The benefits of red wine, in particular, are thought to be due to its richness in antioxidant chemicals called flavonols which help to stop arteries becoming clogged up.

Other research shows that wine consumption prevents Alzheimer's disease and that regular 'moderate' drinkers tend to live longer than teetotallers.

Individual varieties of wine are even thought to be good for particular ailments. A light white such as Chablis, for instance, is rich in manganese and helps soothe joint pain associated with arthritis.

Cabernet sauvignon is particularly high in resveratrol, a flavonol which has been shown to fight cancer, heart disease and to stave off Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease.

Others swear by champagne as an indigestion remedy while women facing the menopause might like to try a red Burgundy to boost the circulation.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

