TITLE	The facts about fibre

New research has raised worrying questions as to whether extra fibre in your diet is good for you, or if it actually increases the risk of bowel cancer.

The research was based on a study of patients in the UK and elsewhere with a history of benign bowel polyps or adenoma. It found that boosting the diet with supplements of fibre or ispaghula husk resulted in a significant increase in recurrence of polyps.

'Our study suggests that a low-fat, high-fibre diet with supplementation of wheat bran fibre or ispaghula husk may not be effective strategies for the prevention of colorectal adenoma recurrence,' says Dr Claire Bonithon-Kopp, the leader of the researchers who looked at patients in several European countries.

Polyps are important warning signs. They are common benign tumours that develop from the normal colonic mucus and are present in about one-third of the population.

It is thought that most bowel cancers arise from them. It is estimated that about 5% of polyps will turn into bowel cancer over five to ten years.

Dr Lesley Walker of the Cancer Research Campaign said we should not be worried about eating too much fibre. 'What the researchers were looking at was a fibre supplement, and most of us are far more concerned with getting our whole diet correct rather than using supplements.

'If anything, it will stop people buying something they don't necessarily need. We recommend that people concentrate on getting their diet right. The research is about supplements it is not about understanding diets.

'The research is not about whether fibre reduces the risk of bowel cancer, it is about fibre supplements. I don't think it is relevant to you and me, and to our diets.

'We are left in a situation where, in terms of preventative measures, fibre supplements are not top of the list.'

Specialists urge caution in interpreting the results of the research, pointing out that only 600 patients were involved, and only one-third of those took the supplement.

'I have not heard of any similar findings, and on the contrary, there is very good evidence that wholegrain fibre itself is protective against a variety of cancers,' says Beckie Lang, nutritionist with the Medical Research Council in Cambridge.

'We have no reason to change that view. This is a small study showing a higher risk, and there are huge national cohort studies which show clear associations between fibre intake and a reduced risk of colon disease.'

Dr Lesley Walker says that while the average daily intake of fibre is 12g, we need to get it up to 18g a day.

'We should be trying to increase the variety of fibre that we eat using different sources. Most people only eat two portions of fruit and vegetables a day at best.

'The message is to eat five portions. There is evidence that with a number of cancers, the increased intake of fruit and vegetables is associated with a decreased risk of disease.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

