TITLE	Is wine or beer better for you?

Having a drink is something to be enjoyed, and in moderation may be good for our health - the latest news is that a glass or two of wine may help prevent bowel cancer.

So what exactly is in your favourite tipple and when do the benefits of drinking end, and the risks start? Is red wine really better for you than a beer?

Beer is made from the fermentation of sprouted (malted) barley. Hops are added before fermentation and give a distinctive flavour.

Stout gets its colour from dark-roasted malt, while lager, the traditional continental European type of beer, involves a type of fermentation method different from bitters, ales and stouts.

Beers are virtually fat and fibre free, and contain a little protein. Most provide some carbohydrate, potassium, magnesium and B vitamins - including folic acid.

Half a pint of lager provides 17 pc of the RDA (Recommended Daily Amount), and a good intake of folic acid can lower homocysteine in the blood. High homocysteine levels are a possible risk factor for heart disease.

Contrary to popular opinion, stout, or any other beer, is not a good source of iron - a half-pint provides 0.6mg, which is only 4 pc of the RDA. However, a glass of beer (or wine) promotes iron absorption from a meal.

Beer contains natural antioxidants: phenolics (similar to some found in red wine) and compounds known as melanoidins, formed when barley or malt is heated and which give very characteristic colours and flavours to beers. But does a beer have the protective effects associated with moderate intake of red wine?

Population studies in beer-drinking communities of Australia and the Czech Republic have linked moderate beer drinking with reduced risk of heart disease.

In Dubbo, Australia, a ten-year study of nearly 3,000 men and women born before 1930 found that compared to non-drinkers, those who had a beer or two each day had almost a 20 pc lower risk of dying from heart disease.

And a recent study by Dr Martin Bobak of the Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, and colleagues, among male beer drinkers in the Czech Republic, found that men with the lowest risk of having a heart attack tended to drink daily and imbibed 4-9 litres (7-15 pints) of beer per week.

A regular beer intake has also been linked to reduced risk of kidney stones in a study of the dietary habits of Danish men. All wines are produced from fermented fruit juice - grape juice is most commonly used. White wine is made by fermenting the juice alone, while red wine uses the skins and seeds (the colour comes from the skins).

Champagne and sparkling wine involve a second fermentation in the bottle, trapping carbon dioxide to produce the bubbles.

Wine contains small amounts of minerals and B vitamins (but less than in beer). Compared to white, red wine contains more potassium, iron and antioxidant phenolics. The concentration of phenolics can vary according to the grapes used and where they are grown.

Pinot Noir grapes have high levels of the phenolic resveratrol, and areas that provide warmth and some moisture, such as Burgundy, Bordeaux and Chilean valleys, are optimal. It is these higher levels of phenolics that are suggested to give red wine heart health benefits.

Dr Denis Blache, Research Director, University of Bourgogne, Dijon, is studying the phenolic resveratrol, and comments: 'As well as being an antioxidant, it alters cholesterol metabolism in heart disease and gene expression in cancer.

'Because of the good solubility of phenolics in alcohol, it could be that alcohol helps their absorption - wine is best drunk with a meal - but a lot remains to be demonstrated in this field.'

The recent publication from the Copenhagen Centre for Prospective Population Studies followed the drinking habits of 24,000 men and women for 20 to 30 years and concluded that wine may have a beneficial effect on all causes of death, including heart disease and cancer.

Wine drinkers also tend to eat more fruit and vegetables, have a higher socio-economic status, and a lower disease risk profile.

Spirits are made by distilling fermented liquors flavoured with plant extracts, or left to mature in wooden barrels. They have high alcohol content (around 30g alcohol per 100ml) and distinctive flavours. Whiskies, vodka, gin and most schnapps are made by distilling a beer-like liquor made from grain.

Brandy is distilled from fermented grape juice, rum from sugar-cane juice or molasses, and tequila comes from the fermented pulp of the agave plant. Fortified wines are blends of fermented wine and distilled spirits. Darker spirits have higher levels of congeners.

Spirits are virtually devoid of nutrients, including vitamins and minerals. Their calorie content comes from alcohol only. Adding mixers can alter the calorie and nutrient content.

Matured spirits such as whisky, and brandy, contain phenolics, which are derived from the wooden barrels they are matured in.

Research by Dr Garry Duthie of the Rowett Institute in Aberdeen found that both the phenolic and antioxidant levels in the blood of volunteers were increased by drinking 100ml red wine or matured malt whisky, but not phenolic-free (non-matured) whisky.

Dr Duthie says: 'There is some evidence for the beneficial effects of moderate red wine consumption, but I'm not aware of any for whisky.'

Phenolic compounds have antioxidant activity; the antioxidants mop up excess amounts of 'free radicals' - unstable molecules produced by normal bodily processes and increased by smoking, pollution, too much alcohol and UV light - that whizz around the body with the potential to damage healthy cells.

By counteracting free radicals, antioxidants may help reduce the risk of long-term disorders.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

