TITLE	Lack of exercise puts cancer survivors at risk

Last updated at 09:46 21 April 2008

Cancer survivors could be putting their health at risk by being obese and failing to take enough exercise, research suggested today.

A study found that breast cancer survivors were among those likely to be fat, which could make their prognosis worse.

Obesity and taking little exercise is generally linked to poor disease outcomes, the authors said.

In cancer patients, studies have have linked inactivity and being fat with recurrence of the disease, death and a reduced quality of life.

Scroll down for more...

In cancer patients, studies have have linked inactivity and being fat with recurrence of the disease

More than 114,000 people were questioned for the study, published in the journal Cancer, and asked if they had participated in any activities from a list in the past three months.

The activities included walking, jogging, skiing and weight-training, and people were also asked to name activities not listed.

They were also asked how often they took part in the activity and how long each session lasted.

The authors found that fewer than 22 per cent of survivors were physically active at the ideal level, with the lowest activity rates among female bowel cancer survivors (14 per cent), breast cancer survivors (17 per cent), female skin cancer survivors (19%), and male bowel cancer survivors (20 per cent).

Just over 18 per cent of all cancer survivors reported being obese, with little variation among the cancer survivor groups.

Obese breast cancer survivors were less likely to be active than obese women without a history of cancer.

The Canadian authors, from the University of Alberta, said the finding was consistent with a previous study &quot;that showed that obese women reported a disproportionate decline in physical activity levels after a breast cancer diagnosis compared with non-obese women.

&quot;This finding is cause for concern because physical activity may be particularly important for obese breast cancer survivors.

&quot;Obesity itself is strongly associated with poorer disease outcomes and obese breast cancer survivors may particularly benefit from higher physical activity levels in terms of disease outcomes.

&quot;In summary... cancer survivors have low levels of physical activity and high levels of obesity that may place them at higher risk for poorer disease control and supportive care outcomes.&quot;

However, the researchers did find some variation between survivors according to their type of cancer.

Prostate cancer survivors were more likely to be active and less likely to be obese than men without a history of cancer while male skin cancer survivors were more likely to be active than those without the disease.

Sara Hiom, Cancer Research UK&#39;s director of health information, said: &quot;Being diagnosed with cancer is always a great shock and cancer patients may feel emotionally as well as physically weak while they recover from treatment.

&quot;Many will worry about the risk of their cancer coming back so it is a good idea for them to ask their GP or consultant for advice on planning and maintaining as healthy a lifestyle as is practical according to individual circumstances.&quot;

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

