TITLE	Forty per cent jump in female drinking fuels rise in breast cancer

By JENNY HOPE

Last updated at 22:13 30 April 2008

Increased drinking: Is fuelling the rise in breast cancer

Rising rates of breast cancer are being fuelled by soaring levels of drinking, warn doctors.

Just one in 20 women is aware of the threat posed by alcohol despite evidence that it promotes some forms of the disease.

There has been a steady rise in breast cancer cases in the last ten years when rates should have fallen, according to specialists behind a study at St George&#39;s Hospital, London.

But the impact of screening programmes and declining use of hormone replacement therapy - which should have stabilised or cut breast cancer rates - have been undermined by greater alcohol consumption.

Figures published in the journal Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers and Prevention show there were 4,198 cases among women in London in 2005, compared with 3,968 in 1995.

Researchers also analysed data on how much alcohol women drink and found the amount had gone up by 40 per cent over the same period.

The breast cancer rate has gone up from 80 per 100,000 women in 1985 to 111 in 2005, a rate similar to the average for the country as a whole. Around 44,000 women are diagnosed with the disease each year.

Breast cancer surgeon Professor Kefah Mokbel, who carried out the study, said doctors are convinced that alcohol is to blame for the rise.

Only obesity levels - which are also linked to breast cancer - have shown the same kind of upward trend.

Professor Mokbel, who works at St George&#39;s and the London Breast Institute, said: &quot;We have no doubt that alcohol is one of the most important risk factors relating to our lifestyle.&quot;

However, he warned that only one in 20 women drinkers is aware of any connection between alcohol and breast cancer.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute found women who had a single alcoholic drink each day had a 7 per cent greater chance of developing the most common breast cancer than teetotallers.

Those who consumed one to two drinks a day had a 32 per cent greater risk.

It is unclear how drinking alcohol promotes breast cancer but it may work by raising levels of the sex hormone oestrogen in the body.

Professor Mokbel said experts were expecting to see a fall in breast cancer cases, or at least a plateau effect, because screening is widely taken up by older women and fewer are using HRT since health scares five years ago.

HRT appears to promote the growth of existing breast cancers which means there should have been a drop in new cases as a result, he said.

A couch potato lifestyle could lead to more young women dying from heart disease.

Researchers at Oxford and Liverpool Universities scrutinised information on 75 years of deaths.

The study, published in the journal BMC Public Health, found deaths from heart disease peaked in the 1970s and have tended to fall since.

But in younger women, the drop has stalled - raising fears deaths will soon start to climb.

?Unborn babies may help their mothers combat breast cancer.

Research shows foetal cells cross the placenta to the mother&#39;s body, where they can live for decades in her skin, liver, brain and spleen. Once there, they may fight tumours.

A U.S. study of 99 mothers supported the theory, finding that 26 per cent of the women with breast cancer harboured some foetal cells, compared with 56 per cent of those that didn&#39;t have cancer.

Women who were cancer-free also had higher levels of foetal cells than those with cancer, New Scientist reports.

It is unclear if the foetal cells themselves attack the cancer, or whether they boost the mother&#39;s immune response against the disease.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

