TITLE	One in three under 25s are risking skin cancer by 'binge tanning'

By BEN CLERKIN

Last updated at 00:30 05 May 2008

Binge tanning: Young people are failing to listen to the warnings of skin cancer

One in three under 25s are risking skin cancer by &#39;binge tanning&#39;, a cancer charity has warned.

Cancer Research UK found that a third of young adults spend more than five hours a day in the sun on holiday.

Its survey, published to mark the start of Sun Awareness Week, also shows that one in three would be happy to increase their time in the sun if they did not feel tanned enough towards the end of their break.

Almost half said they would feel upset if they came back from their summer holiday without a tan.

A third would use sunscreen with a low protection factor, 19 per cent are happy to go without sunscreen altogether and 15 per cent would use products such as baby oil to speed up the tanning process.

Even more worryingly, 17 per cent of those surveyed think that sunburn is all part of getting a tan.

Cancer Research UK dermatologist Lesley Rhodes said that young adults are spending too much time in the sun.

&quot;Exposure to ultraviolet radiation from the sun is the primary cause of skin cancer and responsible for around 80 per cent of cases of melanoma, the most dangerous kind of skin cancer,&quot; she said.

&quot;In addition to the short-term discomfort and impact on appearance, sunburn also causes permanent irreversible damage leading to premature-aging and significantly increases the risk of skin cancer. Put simply, the more time young people are spending in the sun, the more damage they are doing to their skin.&quot;

While the problem is particularly evident among young adults, the 25-to 34-year-olds also show a tendency towards binge tanning.

One in five admit to spending more than five hours a day in the sun, with 16 per cent saying they would increase the amount of time they spent tanning towards the end of a holiday if they did not feel tanned enough.

Rebecca Russell from Cancer Research UK, said: &quot;What&#39;s particularly worrying is the lengths young people will go to get a tan, including burning. Sunburn can double the risk of melanoma.

&quot;People who spend their summer holidays outdoors should remember to enjoy their time safely and use sun protection - shade, clothing and factor 15 or above sunscreen - to reduce their risk of skin cancer.

&quot;If you really are desperate for a tan, the best option is to fake it. It&#39;s the only way to get a tanned appearance without causing sun damage.&quot;

Other recommendations from the charity are to spend time in the shade between 11am and 3pm, and to report mole changes or unusual skin growths promptly to a doctor.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

