TITLE	Eat to beat prostate cancer

by Dr JOHN BRIFFA, Dailly Mail

Statistics show that more and more men have been diagnosed with prostate cancer over the past 20 years. The disease is now the second most common cause of cancer death in the UK and will be the biggest by 2004.

Yet, despite the gloomy statistics, there is hope. Mounting evidence suggests the risk of prostate cancer is closely linked to what we eat.

This month, research published in the medical journal The Lancet found that men who consume plenty of oily fish enjoy a lowered risk of prostate cancer compared to those who don't. Other research points to protective effects from fruit, vegetables and soya products.

In addition, while some foods appear to reduce the risk of prostate cancer, others seem to have the opposite effect. Foods rich in animal fat, particularly dairy products, have been implicated.

Research is stacking up to suggest that with a few simple adjustments to the diet, men can reduce their risk of developing this increasingly common condition.

Oily fish such as salmon, trout, tuna, mackerel and herring are rich in healthy fats known as omega-3 fatty acids.

These are thought to have a number of important health-giving effects, including a natural anti-inflammatory action and the ability to reduce the risk of heart disease and depression.

Over the past decade, there has been increasing scientific interest in the role omega-3 fatty acids may have in the prevention of cancers. Recently, research has focused on the link with prostate cancer.

Two studies published in 1999 found that a high level of omega-3 fats in the body was associated with a reduced risk.

This association is strengthened by research which found that men eating moderate or high amounts of oily fish were up to three times less likely to develop prostate cancer compared to those who ate none.

So men might do well to consume at least two or three portions of oily fish a week. Furthermore, a 1998 study associated high consumption of dairy products with a 50pc rise in prostate cancer risk.

Another study, published last year, found that men consuming 21/2 servings of dairy products a day increased their prostate cancer risk by more than 40 per cent.

Alternatives to cow's milk-based dairy products include soya milk, soya yoghurt and soya ice cream. Soya consumption is associated with a significantly reduced risk of prostate cancer.

One study found that men consuming soya milk more than once a day had a 70 per cent reduction in risk of developing this disease.

Cancer is known to be triggered, at least in part, by damaging molecules known as 'free radicals'.

Free radical damage can be reduced through increased consumption of 'antioxidant' nutrients in the diet, such as vitamins C and E, beta-carotene and the mineral selenium.

Antioxidants are generally abundant in fruit and vegetables. Last year, a study published in the Journal Of The National Cancer Institute found that men consuming four servings of vegetables a day had a 35 per cent reduced risk of prostate cancer compared to those consuming two servings a day.

One nutrient which has received special attention is the trace mineral selenium.

A study in the Journal Of The National Cancer Institute in 1998 found that men with the highest level of selenium had one-third the risk of developing prostate cancer compared to men with the lowest selenium levels.

In 1996, a study found that men who took a daily supplement of 200 mcg of selenium had a significantly reduced risk of prostate cancer.

One of the richest natural sources of selenium is brazil nuts. However, taking a supplement is prudent for men who want to reduce their risk.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

