TITLE	The suntan junkies

By Tahira Yaqoob, Daily Mail

Last updated at 09:01 12 May 2003

Six out of ten Britons fail to protect themselves from the sun&#39;s harmful rays despite knowing about the threat from skin cancer.

Although most men and women said they were worried about the effect of exposing themselves to the sun, the temptation to gain a golden tan proved too much.

While 75 per cent of those questioned in a study said they were concerned about dangers from the sun, fewer than 30 per cent protected themselves in the shade, and fewer than 40 per cent bothered to apply high-factor sunscreen.

The survey, commissioned by charity Cancer Research UK for sun awareness week which starts today, comes as more than 65,000 cases of skin cancer are diagnosed every year.

And it followed the British Medical Association&#39;s warning that using sunbeds more than doubles the risk of developing tumours.

The BMA&#39;s Dr Vivienne Nathanson said that all sunbed users should be warned they risk getting skin cancer.

Eighty per cent of skin cancers are caused by exposure to ultraviolet rays. Yet seven out of ten thought tans gave them a healthy glow or made them more attractive - despite bronzed skin being a sign of sun damage.

Only 6 per cent of the 1,850 people asked avoided the midday sun and fewer than 5 per cent bothered to cover up.

Consultant dermatologist Dr Char-Proby said: &#39;Although it is encouraging that many people are aware of the risk of skin cancer, too many of them are still not protecting themselves against the sun&#39;s damaging rays.&#39;

The risk was higher among 16 to 24-year- olds with three- quarters failing to apply sunblock.

Women were more aware of the dangers than men while older generations were more likely to be cautious in the sun.

Just six of the hundreds of people questioned said they would have suspect moles checked by a doctor.

The charity&#39;s scientific expert, Sara Hiom, said: &#39;Sunburn can double your risk of skin cancer. Our skin cancer rates are climbing.

&#39;It&#39;s not enough to know how to be safer in the sun, people must take steps to protect themselves.&#39;

Every year 6,000 people are diagnosed with malignant melanomas in the UK, which can prove fatal if they are not treated. The condition kills about 1,000 Britons a year.

Getting sunburned as a child can increase the risk of developing the disease, which can take up to 30 years to appear.

Among the charity&#39;s tips are:

 Sorry we are unable to accept comments for legal reasons.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

