TITLE	Teens ignore skin cancer peril

Last updated at 09:08 31 March 2004

Young people are ignoring lifesaving advice about the dangers of sunbathing, experts warned yesterday.

More than 70 per cent of 16 to 24-year-olds choose holidays where they can get tanned so they &#39;feel good and look slimmer&#39;, a survey found.

But figures show that cases of melanoma - the deadliest form of skin cancer - have soared by 24 per cent in the last five years.

More than 7,000 melanomas are diagnosed each year - killing 1,700 - and it is the third most common cancer in the under-25s. Over the last 25 years, the rate of increase in melanoma among 15 to 19-year-olds has doubled, while the rate has trebled for those in their early 20s.

Dr Charlotte Proby, a dermatologist for Cancer Research UK, which conducted the survey, said young Britons are obsessed about getting a tan and the popularity of cheap sun breaks is causing a deadly health risk.

&#39;Young people are just desperate for a tan,&#39; she said. &#39;If they are coming back from holiday without evidence they have been abroad that is a no-no.

&#39;But young skin is very vulnerable to ultraviolet radiation. Unless young people change their habits and learn to protect themselves properly in the sun we could be heading for a skin cancer timebomb.&#39;

Experts fear that while young people are often warned about the dangers of holiday binge drinking and unprotected sex, they are failing to recognise the risks posed by ultraviolet rays.

Dr Proby, who works at Bart&#39;s and the Royal London Hospitals, added: &#39;Cheap package holidays and a desire to have a tan are really responsible for the rise we are seeing.&#39;

She said children&#39;s skin is thinner and produces less melanin, the natural agent that protects against burning. Just one bout of sunburn in childhood doubles the risk of melanoma, said Dr Proby.

&#39;But any episode of sunburn, in childhood or adult life, increases the risk,&#39; she added.

The number of Britons going on holidays to sunny destinations such as Spain and Greece soared from 4.2million in 1971 to 27.3million in 1994. Findings from the survey of 1,800 adults show that young people aged between 16 and 24 are most likely to be trying to get a tan on holiday, with only 7.7 per cent avoiding doing so.

Young women often use low sun protection factor creams, with some throwing them away after a few days to ensure they return home brown, the survey found.

A campaign launched by Cancer Research UK, with &pound;400,000 backing from the Department of Health, aims to raise awareness among young people and parents about being &#39;Sun Smart&#39;.

Sara Hiom, who is coordinating the campaign, said only 2 to 3 per cent of young people realise the importance of not burning in the sun.

The campaign features postcards of lobsters, which will be distributed across Britain.

Cinemas will be targeted during the launch of the new Harry Potter film this summer as will young holidaymakers on the Spanish island of Ibiza.

Around 90 per cent of skin cancers are directly related to exposure to ultraviolet radiation.

Recent Australian research has linked a second set of rays, known as UVA, to skin cancer, in addition to the well-established risk posed by UVB rays.

Dr Proby said it is important to use high-protection sun creams, to seek shade at the hottest time of the day and to cover up in the sun.

She also warned against using sunbeds before going on holiday because these often emit high levels of UVA.

Experts are also calling for people to be more &#39;mole aware&#39; - looking for rapidly changing moles on their bodies that could be a melanoma so they can be treated early with more likelihood of success.

 Sorry we are unable to accept comments for legal reasons.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

