TITLE	George: 'I feel fine'

by ALISON BOSHOFF and BEEZY MARSH, Daily Mail

Cancer-stricken George Harrison yesterday told fans not to worry about him, declaring: 'I am feeling fine.'

The former Beatle confirmed that he had been undergoing a course of radiotherapy in Switzerland.

In a statement, his lawyer said that he 'successfully completed this course more than a month ago' and added 'the doctors foresee no need for further treatment there'.

In a message to his friends and fans, Harrison said: 'I am feeling fine and I am really sorry for the unnecessary worry which has been caused by reports appearing in today's press. Please do not worry.'

However, the elliptical statement did not mention cancer and did not say whether Mr Harrison might have treatment in the future elsewhere.

There was no information about the long-term prognosis for the 58-year-old guitarist, who is understood to have developed a secondary tumour in his brain after having an operation to remove a large tumour from a lung earlier this year.

Malignant brain tumours which occur as a secondary tumour to lung cancer usually carry a poor prognosis, with patients living on average only a further four or five months.

Last night Dr Lesley Walker, head of cancer information at the Cancer Research Campaign, said: 'It would be unusual for someone who has suffered lung cancer to then go on to develop a benign brain tumour, but it is possible.'

Although Harrison appears to be confident that the cancer is under control, Dr Walker added: 'The most likely scenario for someone who has had lung cancer is that a brain tumour develops as a secondary form of the disease. Unfortunately, the prognosis for these patients is not usually good.

'Radiotherapy does shrink tumours and can bring them under control. It might make a tumour dis-appear, but that would be rare.'

Lung cancer sufferers have an increased risk of brain tumours.

The disease may reappear as a secondary tumour in the brain because chemotherapy fails to penetrate there. As well as radiotherapy, patients may be given steroids which can delay the spread of the tumour.

Cancer specialist Professor Franco Cavalli, of the Sainta Giovanni Hospital in Bellinzona, Switzerland - where Mr Harrison was treated in May - said: 'He has not recovered, but he is not a patient any more.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Are you looking forward to the Wonder Woman TV series?

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

