TITLE	Flip-flops may 'raise risk of skin cancer'

Last updated at 10:25 13 June 2008

They are terribly comfortable, and terribly fashionable. But flip-flops and sandals could also be terribly bad for your health.

Experts have warned that such flimsy footwear increases our risk of skin cancer.

The straps leave delicate areas exposed - and too few of us think to apply sunscreen there.

Podiatric surgeon Anthony Kontos has urged women either to apply high-factor cream regularly, or choose closed shoes.

Mr Kontos, of the London Foot and Ankle Clinic, said that cancerous changes on the feet, such as moles and bruises, are often overlooked or mistaken for less sinister conditions.

He said: &#39;The tops of the feet are very sensitive to the sun. The skin is very thin there and it hasn&#39;t had a base coat throughout the year, as the arms might.

&#39;With the increasing popularity of opentoed sandals and flip-flops, feet often have an intense blast of sunlight.

&#39;People are generally aware of checking other parts of their body for suspicious moles but they&#39;re unlikely to examine their feet.&#39;

Skin cancer can occur on the soles of the feet, as well as on the tops, between the toes and under the nails.

Signs of malignant melanoma - the most deadly form of skin cancer - include changes to moles such as itchiness and bleeding.

Mr Kontos, whose North-West London clinic has seen at least two cases of sunrelated skin cancer in the last three months, advises anyone exposing their feet to the sun to coat them with sunscreen.

The British Skin Foundation said that we often neglect our feet when applying sun lotion.

Spokesman Professor John Hawk said: &#39;People do tend to forget that the tops of their feet are exposed to the sun as much if not more than any other part of the body.

&#39;In fact, due to their horizontal nature, exposed bare feet or those in sandals get the full blast of UV radiation.&#39;

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

