TITLE	Lung cancer toll is halved

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Britain leads the world in cutting deaths caused by smoking, figures show.

The number of people dying from lung cancer has halved in the last 35 years because more smokers are quitting the habit. There is also evidence that giving up cigarettes by the age of 30 eradicates most of the risk of dying prematurely from smoking. Even smokers in their 60s can improve their survival chances by stubbing out cigarettes for good.

The data was presented by leading health statisticians Sir Richard Doll and Sir Richard Peto. Professor Doll, whose research 50 years ago first linked smoking to lung cancer in the UK, and Professor Peto compared the results of his original study with a new investigation into smoking habits. 'Our 1950 study showed that smoking was a cause of most of the lung cancer in Britain at that time, and our new study shows that widespread cessation of smoking has halved the number of lung cancer deaths that would otherwise be occurring in Britain in the year 2000,' said Professor Doll.

In 1950, the UK had one of the highest rates of lung cancer in the world at a time, when 80 per cent of men smoked. But Professor Doll's research triggered a sea change in British society which led to a steady fall in smoking rates and levels of lung cancer - a trend not seen in the U.S. until the 1970s.

Since 1965, when the UK had the world's worst lung cancer death rate, the number of tobacco-related deaths in those aged 35 to 69 has almost halved, from 80,000 in 1965 to 43,000 in 1995 - a fall unmatched by any other nation. Annual tobacco sales in the UK fell from &pound;150billion in 1965 to &pound;80billion in 1995.

And because so many smokers have stopped, the new study published in the British Medical Journal was able to assess the health benefits of prolonged cessation. Even smokers who leave it until middle age to give up avoid most of their later risk of being killed by tobacco, while those who stop earlier reduce their risk still further.

The study found that among men who continue to smoke, 16 per cent can expect to die from lung cancer before the age of 75. Those who stop smoking at 50 have a six per cent risk of dying prematurely, while those who pack it in by the age of 30 run only a two per cent risk of dying from lung cancer -virtually the same as that for lifelong nonsmokers.

Half of all cigarette smokers will eventually be killed by tobacco if they don't stop and although the studies concentrate on lung cancer, the trend is the same for other diseases caused by smoking such as heart disease and the lung disorder emphysema.

The benefits of quitting also apply to women smokers, who face a ten per cent risk of dying prematurely of lung cancer.

Professor Doll, an 87-year-old former smoker who works at the Imperial Cancer Research Fund's Oxford unit, said: 'In 1950, 80 per cent of the men and 40 per cent of the women in Britain smoked. Nowadays, among people over the age of 50 there are twice as many ex-cigarette smokers as cigarette smokers, and tobacco deaths are decreasing rapidly.

'But smoking is still the biggest cause of premature death in Britain.' The probable reason for improved life expectancy is that stopping smoking halts changes made to DNA which can trigger cancer when sufficient cell mutations have been created.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

