TITLE	Foods that prevent cancer

by NAOMI COLEMAN, femail.co.uk

We know that the function of food is to give us energy, but there are certain foods that can actually protect our bodies from serious diseases such as cancer and heart conditions.

Eating grapes, for example, play an important role in protecting against cancer. This is because of essential phytochemicals - plant-based chemicals that produce 'antioxidant' activity and help fight off foreign bodies. Garlic, on the other hand, is known to benefit the heart.

The immune system is a complex network of organs that include the spleen, skin, bone marrow, tonsils, adenoids - the tissue found at the back of your throat - and the lymphatic system.

So how do you know if your immune system is up to scratch?

'Contrary to popular thought, a short-lived sore throat actually means your immune system is in working order,' says homeopath and naturopath Beth MacEoin.

Eating plenty of fresh fruit and vegetables play an important role in protecting our bodies against serious diseases and anti-ageing. Add some simple lifestyle changes and you have the ideal recipe for a strong immune system that will keep your body fighting fit.

Here, we present some foods and lifestyle tips guaranteed to boost your immune response naturally

Grapes 

Grapes have been shown to play an important role in protecting against cancer. This is because of important phytochemicals - plant-based chemicals which produce 'antioxidant' activity. This is our body's defence mechanism against free radicals - highly-reactive molecules that may lead to premature ageing and disease. Eating grapes can also lower cholesterol levels, reduce incidence of allergies and help promote an efficient circulatory system. For maximum benefits, choose red or purple grapes - as they contain higher levels of antioxidants compared to green grapes.

Green tea 

Green tea (drunk without milk) is attracting an increasing amount of attention as a healthy alternative to caffeinated drinks such as coffee, black tea and colas. Caffeinated drinks - if drunk on a regular basis - can cause sleep disturbance, breast tenderness, recurrent headaches and increased blood pressure. This is because the effects of caffeine can over-stimulate the nervous system. Green tea containing relatively low levels of caffeine, also contains a high level immunity-boosting antioxidants - which help the body fight bacterial and viral infections which can lead to more serious diseases such as cancer.

Garlic 

Garlic is known to fight bacterial, fungal and viral infections. It also reduces inflammation and benefits the heart and circulatory system. The sulfur compounds in garlic are thought to be the main source of its immune system-boosting effect, because they support the action of killer cells - cells designed to fight off foreign bodies. Anyone prone to recurring infection should eat garlic regularly, as it is thought to be an effective antibacterial treatment.

Fruits containing lycopene 

Tomatoes, watermelons, guavas and grapefruit are rich in carotenoid lycopene. This is a fat-soluble nutrient which appears to have a powerful action on the immune system by producing antioxidant activity in the body. More and more evidence is stacking up to suggest that lycopene might be a useful tool in the fight against a wide range of life-threatening conditions, including cancer.

Yoghurt 

Probiotics - or friendly bacteria found in live yoghurt and other cultured or fermented foods - are being seen as essential allies in our efforts to enhance immunity. Yoghurts containing friendly bacteria appear to inhibit the reproduction of viruses, while also reducing inflammation in the gut.

Here, we outline the foods to avoid 

&bull; Any processed foods that are dehydrated, preserved with chemicals, canned or vacuum-packed. In other words, most 'instant' snacks or meals that suggest all you have to do is add water and stir. &bull; Items that are very high in fat such as sausages, smoked meat or salami. Apart from their generous fat content, such foods also tend to be high in salt and additives. &bull; Convenience foods made from refined (white) flour and sugar, especially if they also contain saturated fat - high intakes of some saturated fatty acids can increase the amount of cholesterol in the blood, and therefore increase the risk of heart disease. . &bull; Indian or Chinese take-away meals. Although fine as a rare treat, Indian dishes tend to contain high amounts of saturated fats, and Chinese food tends to contain chemicals and colourings. Instead, try making healthy stir-fries, using olive oil and chopped vegetables, seafood, poultry or fish.

Click below for some exclusive lifestyle tips on how to boost your immune system naturally

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

