TITLE	The good tea guide

by ANGELA DOWDEN, Daily Mail

Last week's announcement by pollsters Mintel that tea is no longer the nation's favourite drink will have surprised those of us who can't make it through the day without several cups.

It could also mean we are doing our health a disservice because there's evidence that a brew-up can help reduce the risk of heart disease and cancer.

Herbal brews can also be beneficial for our health. They don't contain real tea leaves - from the Camellia sinensis plant - so, strictly speaking, they are infusions.

But before you follow the trend and ditch your cuppa, find out what you could be missing with our healthy tea guide. Here, nutritionist Angela Dowden investigates the most popular types and gives them a health rating out of five.

Oolong tea 

A cross between green and black tea, this partially fermented variety has a light, delicate flavour often likened to peaches.

Healthwise, it has almost as much antioxidant power as the better known green tea, so drinking it regularly will help to boost your defences against heart disease and cancer. Japanese researchers found that exposing human stomach cancer cells to an extract of oolong tea stimulated an increase in tumour cell destruction.

Drink it after a meal as a digestive aid, or after alcohol as a protection against a hangover. Jasmine is a scented oolong tea with the same health properties, prepared by piling jasmine flowers next to dried green leaves so they absorb the fragrance. Cuppa quota: 1-2 cups daily. Health rating 4/5 

Breakfast tea Black (fermented) tea supplies 75per cent of the UK population's intake of dietary flavonoids - antioxidants which reduce blood-clotting and the deposition of cholesterol in blood vessels.

Breakfast blends are among the best contributors because they contain a traditionally strong mixture of Indian Assam and Ceylon varieties. Results from one study suggest that higher intake of flavonoids protect against coronary heart disease. Breakfast tea provides more stimulant properties than other teas, but not the harsh jolt of coffee because the caffeine it contains is quite poorly absorbed. Ordinary teabags are also one of the largest providers of fluoride in our diets - on average, tea provides up to 70 per cent of our total intake of this mineral, which can help in reducing tooth decay. Cuppa quota: 1-2 cups daily. Any type of black tea is better not drunk with meals because it can reduce iron absorption. Health rating 4/5 

Early grey tea Its delicate flavour comes from added bergamot (a type of citrus fruit) which, according to traditional herbal medicine, helps protect against colds and chest infections.

A favourite time to drink a cup of fragrant Earl Grey is after eating, when it can help to digest a fatty meal. Essential oils in tea aid digestion by encouraging digestive enzyme production. However, Earl Grey's more delicate flavour means it has a lower content of diseaseprotective antioxidants. Cuppa quota: 3-4 cups daily. Health rating: 3/4 

Green tea 

Green tea has half the caffeine content of black tea, and laboratory tests suggest it has an even higher antioxidant activity.

The growth of cancer cells isolated from the lung, breast and stomach can be inhibited by incubation with epigallocatechin gallate, one of green tea's active ingredients. And research suggests that regular consumption may help prevent prostate cancer deaths.

Green tea also seems to stimulate beneficial gut bacteria called Bifidobacteria, which help keep gastric infections at bay and maintain digestive health. It seems about half a pint of green tea is needed daily to exert these beneficial effects. Cuppa quota: Around a mugful daily. Health rating: 5/5 

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

