TITLE	Foods to help prevent breast cancer

by NAOMI COLEMAN, femail.co.uk

Health experts believe that adjusting your diet and changing your lifestyle can help protect you against developing breast cancer.

Eating plenty of fresh fruit and vegetables, they claim, plays an important role in protecting our bodies against breast cancer. In fact, some dieticians believe that increasing your intake of fruit, vegetables and reducing saturated fats can actually lower your chances of developing breast cancer by one quarter.

And, according to Suzannah Olivier, author of The Breast Cancer Prevention and Recovery Diet, women in the early stages of breast cancer can help reverse the disease by eating the right foods. It is even thought that those who have a genetic predisposition can avoid their fate by applying certain dietary measures.

Here, we look at five key foods that can help protect you against breast cancer. 

Soya has been shown to protect against breast cancer. This is because of important phytoestrogens - natural chemicals found in plants that protect against damage from bacteria and free radicals - negatively charged molecules which are the by-product of pollution, radiation and smoking. 

Evidence already suggests that soya helps explain a low incidence of breast cancer in Japan.

This is supported by recent studies showing that Japanese girls who moved to America developed a higher risk of breast cancer than their contempories who stayed behind in Japan. Scientists believe that adopting a western diet and giving up soya explained the higher incidence of breast cancer. 

It is now thought that eating plenty of phytoestrogens help block the damaging effects of our own oestrogens and hormonal-like substances such as environmental oestrogens found in plastics and agricultural chemicals.

Too many oestrogens can trigger cell division in our breast tissue which, in turn, can lead to breast cancer. According to nutritionists, eating plant oestrogens found in soya-based products such as tofu, can help block this cell activity. Recommended dose: Two to four ounces of tofu or 11/2 glasses of soya milk five times a week.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

