TITLE	Warning on cancer risk in Chinese medicines

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Some traditional Chinese medicines could contain cancer-causing substances, safety watchdogs warned yesterday.

Dozens of potentially dangerous plant ingredients may be banned to protect the estimated half a million people who use the remedies, said the Government's Medicines Control Agency.

The proposal comes after some traditional Chinese medicines (TCMs) were found to include a toxic ingredient called aristolochia.

It was banned by the agency in 1999 after it caused kidney failure in two British women who had taken it as part of an eczema remedy. They needed transplants.

But a subsequent investigation by the watchdog found several dozen Chinese medicine products still contained the plant, which is also known to cause cancer. Other remedies were found to include the illegal heavy metals mercury and arsenic.

The Medicines Control Agency (MCA) is proposing to add ingredients from 36 families of plants to its blacklist.

These are normally used in medicines made up at traditional Chinese clinics, although a few may be on sale at Chinese supermarkets.

They are not available over the counter in health food shops and in other supermarkets.

Professor Alastair Breckenridge, chairman of the Committee on Safety of Medicines, said it was impossible to reassure the public about the safety of TCMs because there was no quality control process governing their supply and use.

He admitted the problem was the tip of the iceberg as there could be no guarantee of the safety and quality of hundreds of other unlicensed herbal medicines either. 'We recognise that many people value herbal remedies, such as traditional Chinese medicines and are keen that people carry on having the choice to use them,' said Professor Breckenridge.

'However, there is clear evidence that standards used in the production of some TCMs on the UK market are, at best, unreliable.

'While many individual remedies are unlikely to pose any threat to public health, I am concerned that we continue to find further examples of TCMs containing potentially dangerous and often illegal ingredients.

'There is no reliable way for the public to identify those TCMs which could be unsafe.

'In the light of this evidence we are unable to give the public any general assurances as to the safety of TCMs on the UK market.'

Professor Breckenridge denied that the proposed ban was aimed at stopping people from using traditional Chinese medicine practitioners and the remedies they prescribe.

The Chinese medicines sector in Britain had to bring in quality control for imported ingredients.

He said a European Union directive expected shortly would start to tighten controls for unlicensed herbal medicines. The MCA is to consult suppliers, manufacturers and practitioners on its proposed ban.

It includes ingredients such as Ginkgo biloba seeds. These are rarely used in the UK and are not the same as Ginkgo leaf extract, which is widely available from reputable manufacturers and perfectly safe.

In a statement, the Register of Chinese Herbal Medicine, the Association of Traditional Chinese Medicine, The Chinese Medical Institute and Register and the Society of Chinese Medicine (UK) said disciplinary action would be taken against members if the public was put at risk.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

