TITLE	Additive in everyday products 'could cause cancer'

by JAMES CHAPMAN, Daily Mail

A food additive found in many everyday products could be causing stomach ulcers and cancer, according to an alarming, wide-ranging scientific study.

Carrageenan, a gum derived from seaweed, is widely used as a thickener in ice cream, yoghurt, cheese and processed puddings. It is also a fat substitute in processed meats and can be found in condensed milk and some soy milk products, as well as beer and salad dressings.

Dr Joanne Tobacman, a professor of clinical medicine at the University of Iowa, says her review of 45 studies of the effects of the gum, also known as E407, has convinced her that it can cause gastro-intestinal cancers. 'There is very good evidence in the animal studies that carrageenan poses a definite risk,' she said.

Dr Tobacman, whose review appears in the journal Environmental Health Perspectives this month, said there was evidence dating back for several decades that carrageenan might be harmful, but nothing has been done to limit its use. The substance was first commercially available in the 1930s but came into widespread use during the second half of the 20th century. Originally used as a thickener in puddings, it is now incorporated into many processed foods and has also been used in cosmetics, toothpaste and room fresheners.

Dr Tobacman said: 'There seems to be enough evidence associating carrageenan with significant gastrointestinal lesions, including malignancies, to avoid ingesting it. 'There was evidence back in the 1970s that it has harmful effects, and I think we've waited too long to act.'

In a separate study, published in the journal Medical Hypotheses, Dr Tobacman suggests that carrageenan might also be implicated in the increased numbers of breast cancer cases over the 20th century. She said there was evidence that carrageenan is more hazardous when it is broken down by stomach acid.

'In its undegraded form, it has been shown to be a tumour promoter,' she said.'But evidence from animal models has demonstrated that degraded carrageenan causes ulcerations and malignancies in the gastro-intestinal tract. 'I think it is possible people are developing gastro-intestinal cancers and ulcerations through eating products containing carrageenan. 'The increase of these lesions in western society corresponds very much to the time when carrageenan became a ubiquitous part of our food additives.'

Dr Tobacman said that in 1972 the U.S. Food and Drug Administration decided there was sufficient evidence to propose limiting the type of carrageenan that could be used in food products. In 1982, the International Agency for Research on Cancer found enough evidence in animal models linking degraded carrageenan with gastro-intestinal cancers to state that it posed a carcinogenic risk to humans. 'But somehow, the whole issue got lost sight of and nothing was ever done,' she said.

She estimates that the average person on a western diet consumes 10mg of degraded carrageenan each day. Though most of the research on animals has involved higher amounts, these levels of consumption over many years is sufficient to cause 'serious concern', she said. 'If people want to avoid it, they should look at labels and eat basic food products and less processed food,' she added.

However, since carrageenan can be a secondary ingredient --for example, included in condensed milk - it may not always be listed by name. Dr Tobacman said other gums with similar thickening properties can be used instead of carrageenan, including locust bean, guar and xanthan.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

