TITLE	Gardening, the new protection from cancer

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Taking regular exercise may cut the risk of bowel cancer by half, say experts.

They believe that even walking and gardening can protect against the disease - one of the most common forms of cancer.

A report from the Cancer Research Campaign and the Scottish Cancer Foundation pooled results from more than 50 investigations covering more than 100,000 cases of bowel cancer.

It provides the strongest evidence yet that regular exercise is likely to cut the risk of the disease. The protection remains even after other risk factors linked to cancer - such as diet, obesity and smoking - are taken into account.

The report's author Dr Linda Sharp, of Aberdeen University, found sport, manual work and leisure activities such as hiking and gardening all seemed to protect.

Dr Sharp, who works in the Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, said: 'We've analysed a wide range of studies looking at many different types of physical activity.

'Taken together they provide convincing evidence that exercise really does protect against bowel cancer.

This is exciting, because it provides a relatively easy way for us all to reduce our risk of this terrible disease, which claims the lives of over 300 people each week in the UK.'

Other research has shown that regular physical activity cuts the risk of a range of illnesses including diabetes, depression and heart disease and reduces the chances of premature death from any cause.

It is not clear why exercise seems to protect against bowel cancer, but researchers have suggested it may affect hormone levels, the rate of metabolism, or the time that digested food remains in the bowel.

The disease kills around 18,000 people in this country each year, although early diagnosis and prompt treatment greatly improve the chances of survival.

Professor Gordon McVie, director-general of the Cancer Research Campaign, said most Britons are relatively inactive.

He said: 'Regular physical activity doesn't have to mean running a marathon each week. A brisk walk for half an hour, five times a week, is as good a way as any of getting the exercise we need.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

