TITLE	Ovarian cancer alert

by BEEZY MARSH and LECH MINTOWT-CZYZ, Daily Mail

Women who put off having babies until later in life are increasing their risk of ovarian cancer, experts will warn today.

Rates of the disease have leapt 20 per cent over the past two decades, coinciding with a trend towards delaying motherhood until the thirties and forties.

Almost 7,000 new cases are diagnosed each year, and the figures are expected to rise further as more women who put off having children reach post-menopausal age - when the chances of developing the disease are greatest.

Survival rates in Britain remain 'worryingly low', with fewer than a third of women still alive five years after being diagnosed, figures from the Cancer Research Campaign show.

Leading gynaecologists and cancer specialists will sound the alarm over the issue at a meeting of the British Gynaecological Cancer Society today.

Professor Ian Jacobs, president of the society and consultant gynaecological oncologist at St Bartholomew's Hospital in London, said: 'More than 14,000 British women are diagnosed with gynaecological cancers each year.

'Almost half of these are ovarian cancers and, sadly, because this cancer is often discovered late, the outlook for many ovarian cancer patients is poor.'

Each year nearly 4,500 patients die of the disease, which is the fourth biggest cancer killer of women.

Five-year survival rates are among the worst in Europe at 29 per cent, with only Slovenia and Estonia doing worse with just 26 per cent.

Women in Austria and Sweden have the highest chances of survival, with 45 per cent alive five years after treatment.

The prognosis for women in Britain is so bad that cancer experts are testing a national screening programme in the hope of finding a reliable way of detecting the disease early.

Ovarian cancer - known as 'silent' cancer because it has few obvious symptoms - has risen by a fifth in England and Wales since 1980 and by a quarter in Scotland.

If caught early, when it is still confinedto the ovaries, the disease can be cured by surgical treatment. However, by the time many women go to their GP, the disease has spread.

The risk of developing the disease is reduced if a woman has children, and decreases with each pregnancy, due to changes in levels of the hormone oestrogen.

The chances of developing the disease are one in 48, but if a woman never has a child the risk is doubled.

For those who delay motherhood, research indicates that there is also an increased risk, but exact odds have yet to be determined.

Richard Sullivan, head of clinical programmes at the Cancer Research Campaign, said: 'The rates of ovarian cancer are certainly increasing and it is do with changes in social trends. We suspect that the fact that women, unlike past generations, are having children much later plays a part.

'Nobody knows exactly how, but the hormonal changes produced by a pregnancy earlier on seem to have a protective effect. Oestrogen gets dramatically affected.'

The Government's 'cancer czar' Mike Richards said ministers were aware of low survival rates for ovarian cancer and the issue was being tackled.

'The NHS Cancer Plan, published a year ago, recognised that the UK lagged behind many European countries in its cancer survival rates, including those for ovarian cancer,' he said.

'The Cancer Plan sets out a comprehensive strategy to tackle cancers and specific guidance has been published related to gynaecological cancers.

'Good progress is being made, but it will take time before this is reflected in five-year survival rates.'

The latest alert comes after a similar warning earlier this month that women who delay starting a family increase their chances of breast cancer, rates of which have risen 20 per cent in a decade.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

