TITLE	Skin cancer skin peril on ski slopes

by JAMES CHAPMAN, Daily Mail

Millions heading off for winter holidays are being warned that they could face a greater risk of skin cancer than if they were on the beach in the height of summer.

Most do not worry about the effects of the sun when they go skiing or snowboarding. But skin cancer expert Dr Mark Birch-Machin says high altitude winter sports can expose the skin to very high levels of the sun's harmful ultraviolet rays.

Holidaymakers should take at least as much care of their skin on a skiing or snowboarding break as they would do on a summer vacation.

Dr Birch-Machin said that many ski resorts enjoy very sunny days. But even in cloudy weather the UV rays in sunlight penetrate to the slopes.

The higher skiers and snow-boarders go, the greater their risk of serious sunburn because there is less atmosphere to filter the UV rays.

Snow also reflects 85 per cent of the rays off the ground. This means that skiers and snow-boarders can be burnt in unusual areas, such as under the chin and nose, even in the shade.

Dr Birch-Machin said the problem was made worse by the fact that the skin areas exposed to the sun on a ski holiday, particularly the face, are the most likely areas for skin cancer to develop.

In addition, keen skiers and snowboarders will be exposed to the sun's UV rays on the slopes for six to seven hours per day.

Each year about 44,000 new cases of skin cancer are diagnosed in the UK.

Dr Birch-Machin, senior research lecturer in molecular dermatology at Newcastle University, said: 'Most people know too much sun exposure causes sunburn - but fewer people realise that the ultraviolet rays in sunlight cause DNA damage in skin cells which may create a skin cancer time-bomb.

'Skiing and snowboarding are fashionable sports, and people naturally want to look good on the slopes. However, some also like to come back from their holiday with a sun tan.

'In fact a recent report by the Imperial Cancer Research Fund showed the alarming fact that having a sun tan is still very in vogue.

'But it is absolutely essential that people pay as much attention to looking after and protecting their skin whilst on the slopes as they do to looking after other aspects of their appearance.'

Dr Birch-Machin gave this advice to winter sports enthusiasts: Even if it is hot, cover up and wear a long-sleeved T-shirt (the tighter the weave, the more sun protection it will offer) with a zip-up collar, hat, gloves, and good quality wrap-around sunglasses or goggles which offer at least 99 per cent protection from UV.

Regularly apply sun cream of at least factor 15 to all exposed skin. Wear complete sunblock cream on very exposed and sun-sensitive areas like your nose, ears and lips.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

