TITLE	Too much tea can treble cancer risk in women

by JAMES CHAPMAN, Daily Mail

Women who drink too many piping hot cups of tea treble their risk of developing a deadly form of cancer, say scientists.

Our national obsession with the beverage could explain the high rates of cancer of the oesophagus here - 7,000 cases a year.

Researchers have long been at a loss to explain why more women in Britain develop the disease than elsewhere in Europe.

Dr Linda Sharp, of Aberdeen University, said: 'Studies into oesophageal cancer tended to concentrate on men, where the main risk factors were smoking and drinking.

'But women have, at least in the past, tended to smoke and drink less heavily than men, and we wanted to know if other lifestyle factors influenced their risk.'

The study, published today in the British Journal of Cancer, suggests women who drink many cups of hot tea are three times more likely to get the condition than those who drink it warm.

as it passes through the oesophagus - commonly known as the gullet - could be to blame.

Professor Nick Day, a Cancer Research Campaign scientist at Cambridge University and a 0mem-ber of the research team, said no one was suggesting people should stop drinking tea.

'It's a question of moderation,' he said. 'If you're drinking lots of cups of scalding hot tea a day, then the temperature could be damaging the tissue of the oesophagus and increasing the risk of cancer.'

Professor Day said it was the large amount of tea drunk by some Britons that gave cause for concern.

The scientists concentrated on the most common form of oesophageal cancer, called squamous cell carcinoma.

They questioned 159 women from Oxfordshire, East Anglia, Trent and Eastern Scotland suffering from the cancer about their lifestyles.

Experts think the burning effect with a similar number of healthy women. As well as drinking scalding hot tea, the researchers identified other risk factors, including diet.

A fry-up for breakfast carries twice the risk of cereal or fruit. But women who skipped breakfast altogether had five times the risk of the light breakfast group, possibly because food stops gastric acids rising up.

And smokers were three times more likely to get the disease than those who had never smoked. A balanced diet rich in fruit and vegetables was the best protection.

'The worst thing you could do would be to start the day with a cup of scalding hot tea, a cigarette and no breakfast,' Professor Day said.

'Taken together, these factors go a long way to explaining why women in the UK die of oesophageal cancer much more frequently than their European neighbours.'

Bill Gorman, executive director of the Tea Council, said drinking a scalding hot drink of any kind was 'unwise' but 'the vast majority of people are sensible ... and wait a moment or two until it cools'.

He said evidence showed antioxidants in tea were good for the heart and might inhibit certain cancers.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

