TITLE	Obesity may soon be deadlier than smoking

by DAILY MAIL

Obesity could overtake smoking as a leading cause of death, scientists warned last night.

So great is the number of premature deaths caused by excessive weight that the toll threatens to cancel out the progress made fighting cancer and heart disease.

Scientific research earlier this year showed obesity led to more than 30,000 premature deaths annually in Britain from illnesses caused or worsened by being overweight.

The warning, from U.S. Surgeon General David Satcher, said 300,000 Americans a year were dying from weight-related illnesses - an epidemic that could even exceed the harm inflicted by cigarettes.

His report said 60 per cent of American adults were overweight or obese - as were nearly 13 per cent of children, - and the rates were rising steadily.

'The reason isn't a mystery,' Dr Satcher added. 'People eat more calories - too often by shunning fruits and vegetables in favour of super-sized junk foods - than they work off.

'How to solve the problem is vexing, as warning after warning from health officials has gone unheeded.'

The U.S. warning will have a grim resonance in Britain, where smoking kills 100,000 a year.

Trends suggest we are rapidly emulating the U.S. on obesity.

After the obesity study earlier this year, Professor Julian Peto, of the Institute of Cancer Research in Surrey, warned as many as one in ten deaths in non-smokers could be caused by being over-weight.

A total of 58 per cent of adults in Britain are now classed as overweight or obese. As well as cancer, obesity causes heart dis-ease, strokes and diabetes.

Studies have shown the heavi-Dr Satcher's report warned that even being ten to 20 pounds over-weight increased the risk of premature death.

He has called for campaign on obesity similar to the one against smoking. Among his recommendations are for schools to provide compulsory physical education and healthier food.

The poor have a tendency to be fattest, possibly because of fast-food crowding out access to healthier foods in inner cities, a problem which is also common in Britain.

'Sometimes the most fattening foods are the cheapest,' said Dr Satcher.

The Surgeon General called for a study of fast-food marketing practices, comparing the situation to tobacco companies' targeting of inner cities in the 1990s.

He also urged the overweight not to become discouraged if diets did not lead to dramatic weight loss.

Even losing ten pounds could reduce the risk of diabetes or heart disease, as could walking 30 minutes a day. 'Every pound counts,' Dr Satcher added.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

