TITLE	Experts links HRT to increase in cancer

by JENNY HOPE, Daily Mail

Rising levels of breast cancer may be the result of growing use of hormone replacement therapy, an expert claims.

The treatment pushes up the risk of developing the cancer after ten years' use, Mike Dixon, a consultant surgeon and senior lecturer at Edinburgh's Western General Hospital, says today.

It also makes it harder to read screening X-rays, he maintains.

In an editorial in the British Medical Journal, Mr Dixon urges doctors to reassess the value of the therapy, which relieves menopausal symptoms such as hot flushes and loss of bone strength, and consider possible alternatives.

'The evidence that HRT reduces the effectiveness of breast screening and causes breast cancer in women over the age of 50 is clear,' he writes.

The treatment often increases breast density at a time when it would normally be expected to reduce as a result of ageing, making breast X-rays harder to interpret, and potentially undermining screening programmes, he said.

Growing numbers of women in their 50s and 60s are using HRT.

The last decade has seen the incidence of breast cancer rise by a fifth.

Research shows a slightly increased risk of breast cancer for each year of HRT - with the biggest increase after ten years' use.

'I'm not saying women should stop taking HRT or be panicked by this information,' says Mr Dixon. 'But let's give it a lot more thought.'

Using the hormone oestrogen alone rather than with other hormones appeared safer, he adds.

Dr Val Godfree, director of the Amarant Trust, a charity helping women at the menopause, said yesterday there was conflicting evidence about the risks of HRT compared with good data about its benefits.

Analysis of more than 50 studies showed a small increased risk of developing breast cancer after ten years, she said. But it was less than the risk associated with drinking three glasses of wine a day.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

