TITLE	Pill could cut risk of ovarian cancer by half

by BEEZY MARSH, Daily Mail

A hormone used in contraceptive pills may reduce the risk of ovarian cancer, research suggests.

Doctors believe they have pinpointed progestin as cutting the chances of developing the disease by up to 50 per cent.

Most oral contraceptives contain two synthetic hormones, progestin and oestrogen.

Previous research has shown that women taking any form of the Pill are less at risk of ovarian cancer than non-users.

Until now it was thought that this was simply because the Pill limits ovulation.

However, the latest study specifically links pills containing higher doses of progestin to a 'significant reduction' in risk.

Even taking a higher potency progestin pill for as little as three months is enough to provide a health benefit, according to the authors of the report published in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute.

More than three million women in Britain take the Pill, but levels of hormones in each brand vary.

Those with the highest concentrations of progestin, which include Ovran and Norinyl-1, may not be suitable for some women because of the increased possibility of side effects, including nausea and headaches.

Other pills with higher doses of progestin include TriNovum, Ovran 30, BiNovum, Loestrin 30, Ovysmen and Norimin and Brevinor.

Their effects were studied by a team led by Joellen Schildkraut of the Duke Comprehensive Cancer Centre in Durham, North Carolina.

Dr Schildkraut and her colleagues looked at the medical records of 390 women with ovarian cancer and 2,865 women who were free of the disease.

All were aged between 20 and 54 and had been identified from a previous American study into Cancer and Steroid Hormones.

The CASH study collected data on ovarian cancer rates and Pill use in women in 1982. It concluded that all formulations of oral contraceptives seemed to reduce the danger.

However, on examining the data more closely, Dr Schildkraut's team found that brands of Pill with higher levels of progestin were associated with a greater reduction in risk.

The amount of oestrogen in the pills did not seem to make a difference.

Dr Schildkraut said: 'If reduction in ovulation alone was the only protective effect of oral contraceptives, then we would find that all formulations had the same reduction in risk.

'That's not what we found in this study.'

Another piece of research published in the same journal may explain why progestin is important.

Tests on monkeys revealed that progestin in the Pill caused increased cell renewal in the ovaries. That could help eliminate damaged cells which might turn cancerous.

In the study, 80 monkeys were divided into four groups: one receiving a 'combined' pill containing oestrogen and progestin, one receiving progestin alone, one receiving oestrogen and a control group given nothing.

Calling for further research Dr Schildkraut said: 'We believe these two studies show that there are biological effects related to progestin that are playing a role in the reduction of ovarian cancer risk associated with oral contraceptive use.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

