TITLE	Why marksman Ian Marsden is getting better from leukaemia

by LAURA COLLINS, Daily Mail

Subsequent tests revealed he had chronic myeloid leukaemia and only five years to live unless a bone marrow donor was found. Then Ian, who lives in Glenfarg, Perthshire, with wife Hazel, 39, a nurse, and their sons Greg, eight, and Scott, six, was selected to take part in the trials of a new drug called Glivec - and started to get better.

In October he won the Commonwealth Champions gold medal and he will captain the Scottish team at the Commonwealth Games 2002. Here, he tells his remarkable tale. 

A routine blood test on Friday, September 10, 1999, changed everything. I was asked to go to my GPs surgery and thought it might be bad news - but I could not have envisaged just how bad.

When we saw him, he explained that my white blood cell count was 188 - when the normal is about 11. Hazel is a nurse and as soon as she heard that, she asked: 'Is it leukaemia?' When he admitted it was the most logical explanation, I was stunned.

I didn't even feel unwell - a bit tired maybe, but I put that down to the fact that I was covering for a colleague who was on holiday.

I was putting in extra hours and never had time to stop for lunch. I'd gone to the doctor only because Hazel made me. She was concerned because I'd lost weight - I'd gone from 12st 7lb to 10st in about a month - but it didn't occur to me there might be anything sinister behind it.

But the doctor had thought it might be an issue, which is why he took the blood test. He said he had made an appointment for me on the Monday at Ninewells Hospital in Dundee, so Hazel and I went home and pretended to be calm.

I had to work on the Saturday because there was a large stag party at the estate that weekend and as estate manager I had to make sure their schedule was up and running.

Just as I was tidying up my desk a young man came into my office to ask about shooting timetables. He was one of the party - and by complete coincidence, the next time I saw him was at the hospital when he told me I had chronic myeloid leukaemia.

It didn't really make an impact - I had no idea how it was going to affect my life. Under local anaesthetic they took bone marrow and bone core samples from my pelvis to

find out if a suitable donor was registered and to see how aggressive the leukaemia is.

Afterwards I was told the only cure was a bone marrow transplant. I remember thinking: 'OK then, I'll find a match and have one.'

I had no idea that it was far more complex. My sister turned out not to be a suitable match. And it turns out that siblings are the best hope - it's highly unlikely that your parents, children or partner will be a match.

But I was sure something would come up. I was referred to the specialist bone marrow transplant unit in Glasgow's Royal Infirmary and they took on the search for a donor.

It was then I was told the facts: There is a 40 per cent mortality rate and that, for as long as possible, it's best to hold off taking any medication because that way there are fewer complications and a better recovery from a transplant.

was no one on the national donor register so the search was expanded to the international one. By February 2000, there was nowhere else to look and no donor had been found.

I tried not to be too downhearted. I reasoned that I was relatively young and that it was only a matter of time until we found the right person.

But time wasn't on my side. chronic myeloid leukaemia inevitably becomes acute without treatment and that can happen in a matter of days, months or years. After a few months I was feeling the strain physically and emotionally. I kept going to work - I never stopped throughout my illness - but I was struggling.

I had no energy to run around with the boys and they referred to my illness as 'Daddy's cold' and ask why my blood was 'bad'. It was heartbreaking.

Suddenly, I was scared and in June 2000, it was decided I'd waited long enough and I started on the drug Interferon Alpha. Every evening before going to bed I had to inject myself with 10mg - in my stomach, my leg, my arm, wherever I could stand it.

After almost a year on the drug the injection sites were so hardened and sore I felt like a pincushion.

And every week the same news would come back from the blood tests - my Philadelphia chromosome count, the genetic marker of leukaemia, was at 100 per cent and showing no signs of diminishing.

I began to lose my hair, was fatigued and depressed. I tried to keep up-beat, but it was so difficult.

I was losing more weight and my platelet count was plummeting, which meant my blood wasn't clotting properly and my gums would bleed incessantly - I'd wake up each morning and the pillow would be covered in blood.

I tried to continue with my shooting but was too weak to raise the gun. My dose was reduced to 5mg and that made me feel a bit better but still didn't tackle the illness - I thought I'd run out of options.

Then in October I heard about the Glivec trial. Hazel and I had been trawling the internet in the hope of a breakthrough and there it was. I asked my consultant about it and he referred me to Dr Tessa Holyoake who was running the trials from Glasgow Royal Infirmary.

There were certain conditions you had to meet to be included and, after speaking to Dr Holyoake on the phone, I was included in the Interferon intolerant category.

I travelled to Glasgow at the beginning of November 2000 to collect my first instalment of Glivec. I take four tablets every night with my evening meal, and during the trial had to have bone marrow and bone core samples every three months as well as blood tests for cell counts.

I've been on Glivec for over a year now and experienced very few side-effects. I get the occasional muscle cramp or ache and puffy eyes due to fluid retention in the eyelids.

But it dies down by lunchtime and I've been told to drink tonic water as the quinine in it helps.

I'm not sure what I would do now if a bone marrow donor were to be found. It's still the only cure but it carries high risks and no guarantees. Would I stop taking the drug that's helping me and take a risk? I don't know, but right now it doesn't seem to matter.

I'd forgotten what it was like to feel well, to be able to spend time with Hazel and to look after her as much as she looks after me. I'm not in remission, but I'm still alive and I'm getting better every day.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

