TITLE	Can alternative medicine stop cancer reoccuring?

Like every gland in the body, the prostate has nutritional needs. Feeding the prostate with important nutrients may promote health in the gland, and help protect it from disease including cancer. Probably the most important nutrients in this respect are the mineral zinc and the essential fatty acids.

Zinc can be found in fish, seafood (especially oysters) and seeds. Essential fats can be found in raw nuts and seeds, oil fish such as salmon, trout, mackerel and herring and extra virgin olive oil. You might also take a supplement of healthy fats. I recommend 1 tablespoon of flaxseed (linseed) oil each day.

There is some evidence that prostate cancer is linked to the consumption of fat, particularly the saturated variety found in meat, milk and other dairy products. These foods should be kept to a minimum in the diet. High vegetable consumption is associated with lowered prostate cancer risk, so it may help to increase the consumption of these.

Of particular importance here are tomatoes. These contain an antioxidant called lycopene that appears to protect against prostate cancer. Lycopene appears to be best absorbed once it has been cooked in oil, so tomato based sauces such as those used for pizza and pasta dishes should be emphasised in the diet. A recent study found that men with prostate cancer who ate tomato-based sauces had lower levels of prostatic specific antigen (a measure of prostate cancer activity) than men who did not eat much tomato sauce.

 In addition, I recommend a supplement of lycopene. Take 10-30 mg per day. One other nutrient that might help you is selenium. This trace mineral seems to help protect against cancer of the prostate. One study has shown that 200mcg of selenium each day reduced the risk of prostate cancer by about two-thirds.

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

