TITLE	Sunbeds 'can double the risk of skin cancer'

By JAMES CHAPMAN, Daily Mail

PEOPLE who use sunbeds or sunlamps to top up their tans run a mucher greater risk of developing skin cancer, an expert has warned.

Professor John Hawk advised the three million Britons who use such devices to stop because of the danger.

A study published today shows that sunlamps or beds can more than double the chances of developing one of the most common forms of skin cancer.

Over 900 people who had developed cancers were quizzed about their use of tanning devices, history of sun exposure, tendency to burn in the sun, previous radiation treatment, and their smoking habits.

Those who had used tanning devices were two and a half times more likely to develop squamous cell carcinoma, a form of skin cancer that develops when ultraviolet light makes cells in the skin reproduce faster, resulting in a tumour.

If not caught in time, it can

spread rapidly to major organs. It affects 7,200 victims a year in Britain and kills more than 400.

Sunbed and sunlamp users were also one and a half times more likely to develop basal cell carcinoma --diagnosed in more than 29,000 cases a year in the UK.

The research suggested that the earlier people start tanning, the higher the risk - by up to 20 per cent in younger users.

Professor Hawk, consultant dermatologist at St Thomas's Hospital in London, said: 'This information confirms all our fears. I certainly wouldn't use a sunbed or recommend that anybody uses one. People should not be able to buy one or use one in a tanning salon without a Government health warning.'

Sunbeds came into fashion in the 1970s and by the mid-1980s they were a boom industry.

The all-year tan is now generally mocked by the health-conscious, but sunbeds remain popular.

Professor Margaret Karagas, of Dartmouth Medical School in New Hampshire, in the U.S., whose findings are reported in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, said the growing popularity of artificial tanning was a real cause for concern.

She said: ' Tanning lamps mimic sunlight and provide an intense, concentrated dose of ultraviolet radiation.

'Users often get a burn like sunburn, and sunburn is linked to the risk of three skin cancers --basal cell, squamous cell and melanoma.' Sara Hiom, of Cancer Research UK, said: 'There is no such thing as a safe tan, whether it's achieved through sun lamps or the sun itself. A tan is actually the body's response to DNA damage.'

 We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday  and  Metro Media Group

